2025

AP Research
Academic Paper
®

Sample Student Responses
and Scoring Commentary

Inside:
Sample J
☑5 Scoring Guidelines
☑5 Student Samples
☑5 Scoring Commentary

© 2025 College Board. College Board, Advanced Placement, AP, AP Central, and the acorn logo are registered trademarks of
College Board. AP Capstone is a trademark owned by College Board. Visit College Board on the web: collegeboard.org.
AP Central is the official online home for the AP Program: apcentral.collegeboard.org.

AP® Research 2025 Scoring Guidelines

Academic Paper

5 Points

Report on Existing Knowledge

Report on Existing Knowledge
with Simplistic Use of a Research
Method

Score of 2

Score of 3

Ineffectual Argument for a New
Understanding

Well-Supported, Articulate
Argument Conveying a New
Understanding

Score of 4

Score of 5

• Presents an overly broad topic of
inquiry.

• Presents a topic of inquiry with
narrowing scope or focus, that is
NOT carried through either in the
method or in the overall line of
reasoning.

• Carries the focus or scope of a
topic of inquiry through the
method AND overall line of
reasoning, even though the focus
or scope might still be narrowing.

• Focuses a topic of inquiry with
clear and narrow parameters,
which are addressed through the
method and the conclusion.

• Focuses a topic of inquiry with
clear and narrow parameters,
which are addressed through the
method and the conclusion.

• Situates a topic of inquiry within
a single perspective derived from
scholarly works OR through a
variety of perspectives derived
from mostly non-scholarly works.

• Situates a topic of inquiry within
a single perspective derived from
scholarly works OR through a
variety of perspectives derived
from mostly non-scholarly works.

• Situates a topic of inquiry within
relevant scholarly works of
varying perspectives, although
connections to some works may
be unclear

• Explicitly connects a topic of
inquiry to relevant scholarly
works of varying perspectives
AND logically explains how the
topic of inquiry addresses a gap.

• Explicitly connects a topic of
inquiry to relevant scholarly
works of varying perspectives
AND logically explains how the
topic of inquiry addresses a gap.

• Describes a search and report
process.

• Describes a nonreplicable
research method OR provides an
oversimplified description of a
method, with questionable
alignment to the purpose of the
inquiry.

• Describes a reasonably replicable
research method, with
questionable alignment to the
purpose of the inquiry.

• Logically defends the alignment
of a detailed, replicable research
method to the purpose of the
inquiry

• Logically defends the alignment
of a detailed, replicable research
method to the purpose of the
inquiry.

• Summarizes or reports existing
knowledge in the field of
understanding pertaining to the
topic of inquiry.

• Summarizes or reports existing
knowledge in the field of
understanding pertaining to the
topic of inquiry.

• Conveys a new understanding or
conclusion, with an
underdeveloped line of reasoning
OR insufficient evidence.

• Supports a new understanding or
conclusion through a logically
organized line of reasoning AND
sufficient evidence. The
limitations and/or implications, if
present, of the new
understanding or conclusion are
oversimplified.

• Justifies a new understanding or
conclusion through a logical
progression of inquiry choices,
sufficient evidence, explanation
of the limitations of the
conclusion, and an explanation of
the implications to the
community of practice.

• Generally communicates the
student’s ideas, although errors
in grammar, discipline-specific
style, and organization distract or
confuse the reader.

• Generally communicates the
student’s ideas, although errors
in grammar, discipline-specific
style, and organization distract or
confuse the reader.

• Competently communicates the
student’s ideas, although there
may be some errors in grammar,
discipline-specific style, and
organization.

• Competently communicates the
student’s ideas, although there
may be some errors in grammar,
discipline-specific style, and
organization.

• Enhances the communication of
the student’s ideas through
organization, use of design
elements, conventions of
grammar, style, mechanics, and
word precision, with few to no
errors.

• Cites AND/OR attributes sources
(in bibliography/ works cited
and/or intext), with multiple
errors and/or an inconsistent use
of a discipline specific style.

• Cites AND/OR attributes sources
(in bibliography/ works cited
and/or intext), with multiple
errors and/or an inconsistent use
of a discipline specific style.

• Cites AND attributes sources,
using a discipline-specific style (in
both bibliography/works cited
AND intext), with few errors or
inconsistencies.

• Cites AND attributes sources,
with a consistent use of an
appropriate discipline-specific
style (in both bibliography/works
cited AND intext), with few to no
errors.

• Cites AND attributes sources,
with a consistent use of an
appropriate discipline-specific
style (in both bibliography/works
cited AND intext), with few to no
errors.

Score of 1

Rich Analysis of a New
Understanding Addressing a Gap
in the Research Base

© 2025 College Board

Research Sample J 1 of 5

Research Sample J 2 of 5

Research Sample J 3 of 5
3

Introduction
There have been various amounts of research that has been conducted to try and negate
the affects of eczema such as therapy and different medical treatments. The purpose of the
research is to find a solution to make life for those suffering from eczema more enjoyable and
liveable.
Literature Review
In this literature review, three main topics are highlighted with the treatment of atopic
dermatitis which include the use of psychological support, medicines, and educating those
suffering from eczema to alleviate the toll it takes on them mentally and physically. Atopic
dermatitis also known as eczema is a chronic disease that causes itchiness and inflammation.
Although it tends to start while many are children it can continue into adulthood. Alenazi writes
“The onset of AD most commonly occurs between 3 and 6 months of age, with approximately
60% of children with AD presenting symptoms in the first 12 months.” While it continues to
affect millions daily making everyday life a struggle whether it comes to certain clothing,
confidence, and the motivation to keep going. If we can implement an approach by providing
psychological support, informing those affected by eczema, and encouraging safe therapeutic
practices then we'd be able to negate the mental effects which would improve the quality of life
as a whole.Understanding these affects are very important. Making sure those suffering with
atopic dermatitis are being treated with the correct care both phsyically and mentaly can help
future generations who may suffer from atopic dermatitis.
Main Points

Research Sample J 4 of 5
4

The use of treatments in regards to eczema commonly used are topical creams,
moisturizers, and prescribed medication. These treatments repair the skin and aim to reduce
symptoms. Alenazi writes “Currently no complete cure is available for AD, and the only way to
manage the disease is through palliative treatments.” Using treatments also allows a layer of
protection from possible infections and allows for the affected skin to remain hydrated rather
than dry which would cause the feeling of itchiness. While treatments are only temporary they
allow the affected patient to feel a sense of relief while reducing inflammation causing the
feeling of itchiness to be suppressed.
A treatment that goes unnoticed is the use of informing the affected on the knowledge of
eczema whether it be on the correct use of treatments or the knowledge of what causes flare-ups.
Educating patients allows them to prepare in advance for certain outings whether it's by dressing
appropriately, avoiding areas where it is very sunny or dry, and places with pollen.Patients are
informed and prepared this will prevent flare-ups allowing for the eczema to slowly start to heal
without the worry of the patient scratching and restarting the cycle of itchiness and
inflammation.
As mentioned previously, eczema results in a change of physical appearance causing the
affected area or areas to dry up, leading to inflammation and feeling of itchiness. While their
physical being is altered many overlook the mental effects atopic dermatitis causes to patients
which include the lowering of one self esteem as well as the decline of one's mental health.
Psychological support provides that helping hand or listening ear which allows patients to
destress and communicate on their current well-being. With that being said the use of
psychological treatment is an extremely important factor when it comes to dealing with the
effects of eczema. By providing a healthy and positive environment in which those suffering feel

Research Sample J 5 of 5
5

comfortable once again in their own skin, Psychological support negates outsiders' perspectives
and interpretations of what “eczema” truly is.
It remains evident at the conclusion of my research that with the use of therapeutic,
psychological, and informational treatment the mental and physical effectsc of atopic dermatitis
are allowed to be coped with which allows those who once suffered or those suffering now a
sense of relief knowing that there are now ways to prevent and temporarily silence the presence
of eczema.
Methodology
The method of collecting data and information for this experiment for my research is to
analyze a select group of people who suffer from eczema and see how they are affected by it
mentally on a day to day basis. Using a qualitative approach along with a correlational analysis
research method will allow me to observe the data i have gathered while comparing it to previous
research in order to determine any new findings or if my research was relative to those before.
This approach allows me to also see just how much those locally and around me suffer everyday
from eczema.

AP RESEARCH 2025 • SCORING COMMENTARY

Academic Paper
Note: Student samples are quoted verbatim and may contain spelling and grammatical errors.
Overview
NEW for 2025: The question overviews can be found in the Chief Reader Report on Student Responses on
AP Central.
Sample: J
Score: 1
This paper earns a score of 1. The research focus is on p. 1: “The purpose of the research is to find a
solution to make life for those suffering from eczema more enjoyable and liveable.” The literature review
on pp. 3-5 cites only one source which demonstrates a single perspective. The paper ends on p. 5 after
the one paragraph method section. The method is stated on p. 5: “is to analyze a select group of people
who suffer from eczema and see how they are affected by it mentally on a day to day basis. Using a
qualitative approach along with a correlational analysis research method will allow me to observe the
data i have gathered while comparing it to previous research in order to determine any new findings or
if my research was relative to those before.” There are no reported results past the method as the paper
ends. There is no references page.
The paper provides a conclusion at the end of the literature review: “It remains evident at the conclusion
of my research that with the use of therapeutic, psychological, and informational treatment the mental
and physical effects of atopic dermatitis are allowed to be coped with which allows those who once
suffered or those suffering now a sense of relief knowing that there are now ways to prevent and
temporarily silence the presence of eczema.” However, the conclusion is not derived from student
generated data from the correlational analysis research method. Though the abstract on p. 2 references
results from a survey method, the abstract is not included in the scoring of the paper.
This paper does not earn a score of 0 because the paper has a researchable topic, the impact of eczema
and mental well-being, and attempts a report on existing knowledge. The topic of eczema is carried
throughout the introduction, literature review, and purported methodology.
The paper does not earn a score of 2 because there is no evidence that the method of “qualitative” and
“correlational” analysis (p. 5) was used by the student. There is no student generated data.

© 2025 College Board.

Visit College Board on the web: collegeboard.org.	

