2025

AP Research
Academic Paper
®

Sample Student Responses
and Scoring Commentary

Inside:
Sample D
☑5 Scoring Guidelines
☑5 Student Samples
☑5 Scoring Commentary

© 2025 College Board. College Board, Advanced Placement, AP, AP Central, and the acorn logo are registered trademarks of
College Board. AP Capstone is a trademark owned by College Board. Visit College Board on the web: collegeboard.org.
AP Central is the official online home for the AP Program: apcentral.collegeboard.org.

AP® Research 2025 Scoring Guidelines

Academic Paper

5 Points

Report on Existing Knowledge

Report on Existing Knowledge
with Simplistic Use of a Research
Method

Score of 2

Score of 3

Ineffectual Argument for a New
Understanding

Well-Supported, Articulate
Argument Conveying a New
Understanding

Score of 4

Score of 5

• Presents an overly broad topic of
inquiry.

• Presents a topic of inquiry with
narrowing scope or focus, that is
NOT carried through either in the
method or in the overall line of
reasoning.

• Carries the focus or scope of a
topic of inquiry through the
method AND overall line of
reasoning, even though the focus
or scope might still be narrowing.

• Focuses a topic of inquiry with
clear and narrow parameters,
which are addressed through the
method and the conclusion.

• Focuses a topic of inquiry with
clear and narrow parameters,
which are addressed through the
method and the conclusion.

• Situates a topic of inquiry within
a single perspective derived from
scholarly works OR through a
variety of perspectives derived
from mostly non-scholarly works.

• Situates a topic of inquiry within
a single perspective derived from
scholarly works OR through a
variety of perspectives derived
from mostly non-scholarly works.

• Situates a topic of inquiry within
relevant scholarly works of
varying perspectives, although
connections to some works may
be unclear

• Explicitly connects a topic of
inquiry to relevant scholarly
works of varying perspectives
AND logically explains how the
topic of inquiry addresses a gap.

• Explicitly connects a topic of
inquiry to relevant scholarly
works of varying perspectives
AND logically explains how the
topic of inquiry addresses a gap.

• Describes a search and report
process.

• Describes a nonreplicable
research method OR provides an
oversimplified description of a
method, with questionable
alignment to the purpose of the
inquiry.

• Describes a reasonably replicable
research method, with
questionable alignment to the
purpose of the inquiry.

• Logically defends the alignment
of a detailed, replicable research
method to the purpose of the
inquiry

• Logically defends the alignment
of a detailed, replicable research
method to the purpose of the
inquiry.

• Summarizes or reports existing
knowledge in the field of
understanding pertaining to the
topic of inquiry.

• Summarizes or reports existing
knowledge in the field of
understanding pertaining to the
topic of inquiry.

• Conveys a new understanding or
conclusion, with an
underdeveloped line of reasoning
OR insufficient evidence.

• Supports a new understanding or
conclusion through a logically
organized line of reasoning AND
sufficient evidence. The
limitations and/or implications, if
present, of the new
understanding or conclusion are
oversimplified.

• Justifies a new understanding or
conclusion through a logical
progression of inquiry choices,
sufficient evidence, explanation
of the limitations of the
conclusion, and an explanation of
the implications to the
community of practice.

• Generally communicates the
student’s ideas, although errors
in grammar, discipline-specific
style, and organization distract or
confuse the reader.

• Generally communicates the
student’s ideas, although errors
in grammar, discipline-specific
style, and organization distract or
confuse the reader.

• Competently communicates the
student’s ideas, although there
may be some errors in grammar,
discipline-specific style, and
organization.

• Competently communicates the
student’s ideas, although there
may be some errors in grammar,
discipline-specific style, and
organization.

• Enhances the communication of
the student’s ideas through
organization, use of design
elements, conventions of
grammar, style, mechanics, and
word precision, with few to no
errors.

• Cites AND/OR attributes sources
(in bibliography/ works cited
and/or intext), with multiple
errors and/or an inconsistent use
of a discipline specific style.

• Cites AND/OR attributes sources
(in bibliography/ works cited
and/or intext), with multiple
errors and/or an inconsistent use
of a discipline specific style.

• Cites AND attributes sources,
using a discipline-specific style (in
both bibliography/works cited
AND intext), with few errors or
inconsistencies.

• Cites AND attributes sources,
with a consistent use of an
appropriate discipline-specific
style (in both bibliography/works
cited AND intext), with few to no
errors.

• Cites AND attributes sources,
with a consistent use of an
appropriate discipline-specific
style (in both bibliography/works
cited AND intext), with few to no
errors.

Score of 1

Rich Analysis of a New
Understanding Addressing a Gap
in the Research Base

© 2025 College Board

Research Sample D 1 of 27

Motivations of Second Career Teachers
AP Research
Word Count: 4919

Research Sample D 2 of 27

Introduction
Only one third of teachers in the United States claimed they were very satisfied with their
job (Pew Research Center, 2023). The recently developed teacher shortage is a pressing issue not
only in the United States, but everywhere. In fact, a report on teachers disclosed an urgent need
for 44 million primary and secondary teachers globally by 2030 (UNESCO, 2024). The 2020
pandemic accelerated the shortage of teachers as many were upset in their career as a result of
remote teaching and other frustrating circumstances. This facilitated many early retirements and
resignations. Negative media campaigns that were critical of teachers also took a toll on their
happiness in the profession. These issues made it difficult to staff teachers in schools and even
harder to retain them (White et al., 2024).
My research revolved around individuals who joined the teaching profession after
working previous jobs and studying other majors. This is because recruiting individuals to teach
as a second career could be a way to mitigate the teacher shortage. According to previous
research, a second career teacher is defined as someone over the age of twenty-five who has
acquired valuable life experience from time in previous occupations and situations. The only
profile that represents a true second-career teacher is an individual who did not have any
previous connection to education (Tigchelaar et al., 2008 as quoted in Bar-Tal et al., 2020).
According to a 2017 Harris Poll on K-12 teachers, one in three teachers started off in different
careers. This reveals that teaching as a second career is a fairly common experience among
individuals, so this research topic seemed meaningful. I am trying to gain a new understanding of
what factors drew teachers who pursued non-traditional career paths into education. The current
climate of the teacher shortage and difficulty in recruiting teachers is what changed since the last

Research Sample D 3 of 27

time anyone asked this question. It is important to have this updated information available to
understand how to combat this teacher deficit.
Therefore, these ideas led me to my research question: what are the extrinsic and intrinsic
factors that drew current teachers, who did not major in education in undergrad, to pursue a
career in teaching at the high school level?
Review of Literature
Factors and Motivations
Extrinsic motivations “concern behaviors done for reasons other than their inherent
satisfactions” (Ryan & Deci, 2020, p. 2). Examples of extrinsic motivators for teachers found in
a typical school setting include having a considerably high salary and solid cooperation with
students and parents (Hughes, 2012). Alternatively, intrinsic motivations were activities done for
their own inherent interest and satisfaction (Deci & Ryan, 2000). Intrinsic motivators for teachers
were factors such as having strong leadership, nurturing collaborative relationships in the
workplace, and fostering supportive social ties (Fuller et al., 2016). Other examples were having
an inclination to work with children, being service-oriented, and feeling a genuine passion to
teach (Hogg, 2023). Due to these motivators, teachers are an essential topic of study in relation
to extrinsic and intrinsic motivations.
Career-Change Teachers (CCTs) and Second-Career Teachers (SCTs)
Bar-Tal et al. (2020) examined factors that heightened job satisfaction in SCTs. They
compared first-career teachers (FCTs) with second-career teachers (SCTs) and found no
significant difference in their satisfaction levels. Both groups reported significant differences in
their methods of coping with situations in relation to difficult students and parents. SCTs

Research Sample D 4 of 27

perceive certain situations like parent overreach and difficult students as significantly less
stressful as they are typically more experienced throughout life, including possibly being a
parent, as well as displaying higher self-efficacy in relationships (Addi-Raccah & Ainhoren,
2009). Furthermore, a later example proves that one of the biggest predictors of satisfaction for
FCTs was their workload. The greater amount of workload FCTs experienced, the lower their
satisfaction levels were. This overwhelming feeling of bombardment contributed to their low
satisfaction levels. As for SCTs, when they experienced a high-intensity workload, it was not
found to impact them. This differing impact on job satisfaction is a likely result of how they
utilized coping strategies in the workplace. Additionally, SCTs’ satisfaction levels during their
first five years of teaching remained steady, while FCTs’ satisfaction levels fluctuated in a
U-shaped pattern (Bar-Tal et al., 2020). This could partially be due to the fact that SCTs have
more experience and can carry on their previous experience with other situations into education,
making their satisfaction levels more regular than a novice teacher.
Hughes (2012) noted that teachers who experienced better support, cooperation, and
participation with parents and students were more likely to stay in the profession. The research
done in this study is similar to the research done by Bar-Tal et al. (2020) as both studies placed
emphasis on the influence of students and parents on job satisfaction for teachers. When teachers
have a positive experience with their varying professional relationships, they have a seemingly
more promising outlook when it comes to staying in the profession.
Career-change teachers (CCTs) were termed as “individuals who have ‘pursued a
different career or type of employment before making the decision to leave that career and
become a teacher’” (White et al., 2024, p. 4). Due to the similar definitions, second-career

Research Sample D 5 of 27

teachers and career-change teachers were used synonymously throughout my research paper to
avoid confusion. Second-career teachers were more commonly referenced; however, CCTs were
mentioned throughout this literature review because of how other researchers cited it in their
papers.
Previous studies have identified various incentives for why individuals decide to become
teachers. Lee (2011) conducted a study on the motivations and experiences that serve as catalysts
for teacher motivation. The author concluded that the most popular catalysts among participants
were: a desirable professional life, passion to work with children, propensity to make a
difference, and hope to influence the future. Some SCTs had previous jobs and professional skills
that carried on from their old job into their new profession as a teacher, such as communication
skills, overall attitude towards the profession, and leadership and organizational skills (Khan,
2024). Evidently, individuals become attracted to teaching due to different reasons, whether that
be from outside or within.
Since career-change and second-career teachers do not follow the traditional collegiate
path into education, they must follow an alternative certification path to obtain a job as a teacher.
Alternative Certification Paths (ACPs)
An alternative certification path, or ACP, allows individuals to attain a teaching career
within a shorter time span than someone who took the traditional path and studied the career in
college (Tigchelaar et al., 2008). A study done by Evans (2011) compares individuals who took
the traditional collegiate career path versus those who went through an ACP to obtain
certification. Both FCTs and SCTs concluded that working with students was a primary pull
factor in the career. Additionally, those who took the traditional path were primarily inspired by

Research Sample D 6 of 27

their own teachers early on in their education. These positive experiences in school largely
contributed to their career choice. Individuals who took an ACP claimed they were unsatisfied
with their previous careers and looked for fulfillment elsewhere. ACPs make it much easier for
people to switch careers and are a popular choice if individuals decide to become teachers.
Overall, being dissatisfied with any previous career and having a deep-rooted passion to be a
teacher were major factors in joining the profession (Evans, 2011; Hogg, 2023).
Participants note that time is considered both an enabler and constraint of the ACP
program. Individuals enjoy the abridged program, but struggle to meet certain time requirements
and deadlines along with it (White et al., 2024). It is essentially packing four-years worth of
education into a few semesters, so it is more time-demanding for participants overall. Though
there may be room for improvement, ACPs make it possible for individuals at all different points
in life to become a teacher, and this idea has led me to research the phenomenon behind the
choice to become a second-career teacher.
Ornstein (1982) notes that teaching has become more stressful over time, resulting in
greater burnout and more dissatisfaction in the job. In 1962, dissatisfaction was primarily a result
of salary, conditions of the school building, and poor human relations. However, in 2007,
dissatisfaction was due to poor behavior of students and heavy time demands (Klassen &
Anderson, 2009). Factors such as location of the school, student demographics, gender of
students, and social and personal factors have also been found to be influential on teachers’ stress
levels (Morgan & O’Leary, 2004). Overall, job satisfaction levels over the years have fluctuated
as a result of differing factors.

Research Sample D 7 of 27

Many of the sources I utilized in this literature review were written years ago. The new
evolution of the teacher shortage is now prevalent which indicates that things may have changed.
Given the recent teacher shortage, the goal of my paper is to give an updated understanding of
what has changed since the last time anyone asked this question. These sources and the identified
gap have led me to my research question: what are the extrinsic and intrinsic factors that drew
current teachers, who did not major in education in undergrad, to pursue a career in teaching at
the high school level? The purpose of this study is to explore the motivations of teachers who
pursued non-traditional career paths into education.
Method
The methodology I used to conduct my research was a phenomenological case study,
which allowed me to gain a deep understanding of my participants’ thoughts and feelings in
relation to my research topic. A phenomenological study was defined as “a study that attempts to
understand people’s perceptions and perspectives relative to a particular situation” (Leedy &
Ormrod, 2019, p. 273). A case study was a choice of what to study rather than an actual
methodological choice (Stake, 2005).
I decided on a qualitative method as the goal was to understand the phenomenon
surrounding individuals’ decisions to become second-career teachers. In a qualitative method,
the researcher focuses on a phenomenon, then captures and studies the complexity of the
phenomenon in order to construct “a meaningful picture of a complex, multifaceted situation”
(Leedy & Ormrod, 2019, p. 270). I selected a phenomenological case study because I wanted to
conduct in-depth interviews in order to gather data. Börü (2018) conducted a phenomenological
study. The researcher conducted semi-structured interviews as the primary method to gather data.

Research Sample D 8 of 27

This study is similar to mine as the researcher used this method to look at internal and external
factors, which is almost interchangeable with the factors I researched. I did a case study because
it provided me with the most flexibility in the number of participants, since initially, I was unsure
how many I would be able to recruit. My case study was phenomenological because it allowed
me to gather information about participants' personal experiences surrounding my research topic.
Lee (2011) also utilized a form of a phenomenological study. That research was comparable to
mine, as this author looked at what prompted individuals to become teachers after working in
other professions; this was a major part of my research question. However, the landscape of
teaching has changed dramatically since this piece was published in 2011. There are now much
more intense accountability measures added for teachers, decrease in support for educators, and
the 2020 pandemic. These altered experiences have contributed to new possible motivators as the
environment is incredibly different now compared to fourteen years ago. I was originally going
to conduct a mixed-methods study by doing both a survey and interviews. A mixed-methods
study is a combination of quantitative and qualitative methods (Leedy & Ormrod, 2019). I
decided to reject this method because it did not seem necessary for the kind of information I was
seeking. Though I did use a survey to recruit participants, it was not the best fit to collect
in-depth qualitative data.
My project offered nearly zero ethical issues. I completed a form addressing the few
possible ethical issues that could occur and got approved by the IRB. I provided an informed
consent form for individuals to sign outlining the procedures of my research and any potential
concerns. Individuals voluntarily signed the consent form before participating in my research.
Participants

Research Sample D 9 of 27

The participants of my research ranged from ages twenty-seven to early sixties. I
recruited both males and females and interviewed fourteen participants total. I utilized snowball
sampling in “which one participant suggests another potential participant” (Lee, 2011, p. 6). I
also used convenience sampling which is when participants are chosen from somewhere
convenient for the researcher (Andrade, 2020). I interviewed most teachers from my high school,
specifically, which was convenient for me. I chose to research high school teachers because
teachers at this level play a major role in uniquely shaping students’ lives, and they are very
impactful for society’s future; this makes them a primary subject group worth researching.
A piece of inclusion criteria for my participants is that they must be a second-career
teacher, as defined in my literature review. Participants who did not meet this criteria were not
included in my study.
Materials and Sampling
I measured the catalysts for motivations that prompted individuals to join the teaching
career despite working other professions and majoring in other sectors. I created a survey
through Google Forms and emailed it to teachers at my school to recruit participants (see
Appendix A). I conducted semi-structured interviews with the recruited participants. A study
done by Tigchelaar et al. (2008) utilized semi-structured interviews to gather information on how
alternative certification programs affect second career teachers’ retention rates. The authors of
this study were able to gather valuable information surrounding the research topic that would
have otherwise been difficult to gather just through a survey. Holding interviews allowed for
more elaboration, clarity, and in-depth information which is why my data was obtained through
semi-structured interviews.

Research Sample D 10 of 27

My semi-structured interviews were constructed of fourteen initial questions, and then I
embedded follow-up questions as it deemed necessary (see Appendix A). The interviews ranged
from 10-30 minutes long.
Procedure
Most of the interviews were done in-person with the participants. Two interviews were
done virtually via Google Meet. I used two devices to record the interviews in case one failed: a
computer and phone. The phone was set up next to me and audio-recorded only through a voice
memo app. After an interview concluded, I saved the audio-recorded interview in the app to
which only I had access. I then transcribed the interviews for later data analysis by uploading
them into SoundTrap, saving the transcriptions into my Google Drive, and then manually editing
the transcriptions to fix errors. After I finished the transcription, I divided the interview data
from participants into small sentences that could be coded individually. Then I identified each
individual section of the interviews that I split up and compared them among participants to look
for patterns between them. I combined codes of participants who said the same thing into one
code and slimmed down my list to seven total codes. After the interviews were analyzed, I
deleted them from all devices to ensure protection of my participants’ privacy.
Findings and Discussion
From my interviews, several codes and themes emerged. I put the codes and their
definitions into Table 1 below. I presented my findings in the form of a chart.

Research Sample D 11 of 27

Table 1: Definitions of Themes in Context of Research
Codes

Definition

Corresponding Themes

Work-life balance

Previous jobs too
demanding; wanted
something more
family-friendly

-

Wanted to start a family
Wanted to be home more
Does not involve travel

Void

Felt like something
was missing from the
feeling of fulfillment

-

Lack of fulfilment
One-of-a-kind career
Replacement figure
Making a difference
Seeing growth and success

External influence

Influenced by other
people to become a
teacher

-

Teens versus adults
Having influential teachers

Exposure to kids

Working with kids
prior to career switch

-

Teens versus adults
Enjoy being around kids
Experience coaching and babysitting

Students

Kids in the classroom

-

Teens versus adults
Most enjoyable part of teaching
Seeing growth and success
Teens make it exciting

(Un)predictability

Each day is new and
different

-

Offers variation
Not repetitive or boring

Unsustainability

Not maintainable
long-term

-

Physical/mental drainage of first career
Seeing influence in real time
Making a difference

The table below presents a brief synopsis of key events presented in each interview and
how each experience was identified, given the codes defined in Table 1.

Research Sample D 12 of 27

Table 2: Summary of 14 Interviews
Participant Personal Experience

Themes

1

Prior career was too physically
demanding
Managed/supervised adults
Never know what each day is going
to look like in teaching which is a
good thing
Missed not being able to help people
in old career; teaching was a career
that fulfilled that
Nothing is like teaching
Community of students is the best
part

Unsustainability

Coached football team and realized
that working with teenagers was
enjoyable, then decided to get a
master’s on the teaching track
Positive relationships in old career
and job now
Enjoy seeing growth and success in
others now

External influence

-

2

-

3

-

-

Identified old career as a
“springboard career not meant for
long-term sustainability”
Wanted to start a family and felt
teaching was compatible with that
Coached swimming lessons and
really enjoyed working with kids
Became passionate to work with
kids as a teenager, career switch
coincided with wife getting a new
job: felt like a “natural transition”
Enjoys that each day is different as a
teacher (previously worked a job
with regimented schedule, same
thing on a weekly basis)

Teens versus adults
(Un)predictability
Void, civil/public service
One-of-a-kind career
Students
Relationships

Relationships
Students
Success
Unsustainability
Work-life balance
Outside influence
Opportunity

(Un)predictability

Research Sample D 13 of 27

4

-

5

-

6

-

7

-

8

-

9

-

Adults were frustrating to work with
in old career
Was surrounded by peers and family
who were teachers
Love seeing kids succeed
academically

Teens versus adults

Old job was typical office job:
boring, lonely, and sedative
Liked the idea of having more
people interaction; that is favorite
part of teaching now
Did not plan to be a teacher until
had to be a TA while getting
master’s degree, then fell in love
with teaching
Love being around staff and students

Unsustainability

Adults were frustrating to work
with; felt like babysitting
Boring, not something participant
felt passionate about long-term
Wanted to start a family
Favorite part of teaching is seeing
students learn and succeed

Teens versus adults

Worked solely with adults in old job
Old job was too demanding in terms
of travel
Wanted to be home with children
Most enjoyable part of being a
teacher is students

Teens versus adults
Unsustainability

Managed adults in old job
Worked long days; needed a job that
would be easy with a family
Did not feel fulfilled in prior job
Always thought about teaching, but
did not act on it for a while
Enjoys that every day is different
Teaching is a way to give back
Love seeing students improve

Teen versus adults
Work-life balance

Management job involved lots of
communication and collaboration

Relationships

External influence
Students
Success

Relationships
Opportunity

Students

Unsustainability
Work-life balance
Students
Success

Work-life balance
Students

Void
Opportunity
(Un)predictability
Civil/public service
Students
Success

Research Sample D 14 of 27

10

-

11

-

12

-

13

-

with others
Covid pandemic; wanted to be home
so became a teacher and ended up
loving it
Old job was too surface-level and
phony
Teaching is immeasurable to other
careers
Being able to make a difference was
meaningful
Favorite part of teaching is student
body

Opportunity
Unsustainability
One-of-a-kind career
Civil/public service
Students

Was not reaching full potential in
old job
Previous career was not a passion
Seeing students grow is best part of
career

Void
Unsustainability
Students
Success

Worked in business, then started
coaching which led to teaching
Old job was boring and repetitive
Nothing else like having a great day
in teaching
Love seeing students engaged and
learning

Exposure to kids

“Heard a voice” saying to do
something different
TA in undergrad
Seeing kids finally understand
something
Being a parental replacement for
some students

Internal/External Influence

Days were less predictable than
working in a lab
Immediate feedback, see impact in
real time every day
Working with others
Tutored high school kids
Lack of funding for old job
Met advisor who was inspiring
Seeing kids learn

(Un)predictability

Unsustainability
One-of-a-kind career
Students
Success

Exposure to kids
Students
Success
Replacement figures

Influence
Relationships
Exposure to kids
Opportunity
External influence
Students
Success

Research Sample D 15 of 27

14

-

Wanted to live closer to family;
prompted move as couldn’t continue
previous job in different location
Love to work with people
Met up with old teacher to discuss
pros and cons of teaching; decided
to give it a try
Seeing kids succeed and cultivating
“magic moments”
Always want to help and serve
others

Opportunity, Work-life
balance
Relationships
External influence
Students
Success
Civil/public service

The perspectives I gathered in my interviews delineated the types of experiences that
motivated individuals to become second-career teachers. I excluded the piece of evidence
surrounding if work came home or not. I decided not to include this evidence because I received
varying points of view on this topic and did not have a definitive enough conclusion to make it
one of my themes. It was not valuable evidence to include since I realized this depended on how
hard teachers worked during school hours and the intensity of the subject taught. My participants
taught a range of subjects, so I could not confidently include this evidence. I assumed that all
participants answered the questions honestly, to the best of their ability, and presented an
accurate recollection of their experiences. My goal was to identify the extrinsic and intrinsic
factors that motivated individuals to choose teaching as a second career. The codes I created
from my data collection fall under those categories. In the sections below, I discussed the most
notable and recurring codes that came up during interviews, and combined some of the codes
that correlated into the same section.
Recurring Theme 1: Work-Life Balance

Research Sample D 16 of 27

Out of all my codes, one of the most prevalent was work-life balance. 5 out of 14
participants - Participants 3, 6, 7, 8, and 14 - explained experiences falling under this theme that
made teaching so appealing. As shown in Table 1 above, work-life balance is having time for
both personal and professional duties. For example, Participant 6 stated, “I really just wanted a
job where I knew I could get my kids to practice, and if they had vacation I could be on the
vacation, and I wasn't going to be missing their things because I was working." In talking about
their previous career, Participant 7 explained "It started getting really demanding in terms of
travel and some of that travel was international travel and I had three kids at home so I didn't
really like international travelling."
These participants are prime examples of how a lot of careers are not suitable for having
a family. Being overworked and having to travel makes it difficult for individuals to make time
for their personal lives. Thus, teaching is deemed enticing for this reason as it allows free
weekends, set days off during the year, and not being far away from family. Although
participants all had varied experiences in their previous careers that did not allow plenty of
personal time, the underlying theme was the same: work-life balance. Though it is only 5 out of
14 participants who explained that the family-friendly aspect of teaching was appealing,
work-life balance can still be concluded as a prevalent motivating factor. This is because other
participants may not have had careers as demanding as others. Other participants also could have
been single and without kids at the time of their career switch, making work-life balance not as
inducing. In this case, participants who valued work-life balance felt the need to enter a career
that offered that. When employees work in a demanding career, their enjoyment for the career
may decay as they do not have a lot of time for their personal and family lives. The recurrence of

Research Sample D 17 of 27

this piece of data suggests that the flexibility for work-life balance displayed in teaching in
comparison to other careers is a primary extrinsic motivator for individuals to leave their other
career and become a teacher.
Recurring Theme 2: External Influence and Exposure to Kids
Another repetitive theme was external influence, which also includes exposure to kids. 9
out of 14 participants stated they were influenced by the people around them to become a
teacher. Participant 13 said “This is something I had never considered, it's something I really
didn't enjoy [...] I never really liked explaining how to do things to other people and then I met
my graduate school advisor, who actually was really good at explaining complicated concepts in
a simple way [...] it became fun for me.”
Five of the participants coached and worked around children in prior careers. Several
participants claimed that working with children opened up their eyes to being a teacher where
they could work with young students every day. Participant 11 stated: "I started coaching
volleyball. And then a friend of mine said, 'you missed your calling, you should have been a
teacher.'" Another participant had people around them who became teachers, which made them
consider the job as well: “[My wife] became a teacher and then some friends became teachers
too. I thought teaching would be the best thing for me.” However, participant 12 was influenced
by a mix of external and internal factors. Participant 12 was diagnosed with a tumor and
remarked “When God says you could die, suddenly you hear someone's voice telling you should
do something different. And so that's why I went into teaching at the time. I had a voice in my
head, and it was my department chairman from biology, and he said, ‘We achieve immortality in
the hearts and minds of those that we love and teach.’” This was an interesting piece of evidence

Research Sample D 18 of 27

as it was the voice of a real person in this participant’s life; however, it was also a subconscious
thought. I could not clearly define this as extrinsic or intrinsic motivation, so I considered it to
fall under both categories.
These quotes from participants exemplify how the influence of peers, family, friends, and
interactions with others affect career choice. When individuals are surrounded by people that are
teachers or encourage the idea of being one, they are more apt to become one due to this external
influence. These are all different forms of extrinsic motivations, yet they all drew individuals
into the teaching career.
Recurring Theme 3: Students
13 out of 14 participants mentioned that students are their favorite part of their career
now for a multitude of reasons. Many participants touched on the satisfaction of seeing students
succeed and grow academically. Participant 8 stated “I love when you reap a moment when
someone gets something that they didn’t get [previously]. And you know it’s because of how you
taught it and your approach.” Participant 10 similarly said “I think the biggest incentive was to
help students grow, and to see that growth and be part of that growth was very exciting."
Participant 1 claimed that “You never know what you’re stepping into because teenagers will
surprise you every day, and so to me, that’s kind of what makes it so exciting and fun.”
Given that almost one hundred percent of the participants stated that students were their
favorite part of teaching for one reason or another, it can be inferred that students are one of the
main extrinsic factors to either join or stay in the profession of teaching.
Recurring Theme 4: (Un)predictability

Research Sample D 19 of 27

5 out of 14 participants mentioned the (un)predictability of teaching. Though this
superficially appears as not a significant amount, I chose to include it as an important theme that
occurred due to the unexpectedness of this theme. Participant 8 stated: “I love that each day is
different. I can’t think of another profession, or not too many, with as many variables in any
given day.” Similarly, Participant 1 commented, “I could never work in a cubicle. That’s so
boring and bland, same thing everyday, I think I would go crazy. Here, I don’t feel like that ever
exists.” Participant 5, who worked in a sedentary office job, described the career as “very alone,
very sedative.” Coming from someone who worked in an office job, this coincides with other
participants’ supposed point of view on being stuck in a cubicle every day.
It is clear that some jobs appear to be too boring and bland to be considered sustainable
as a life-long career. Teaching offers variety as it does not involve doing the same thing every
day. New curriculum, lessons, student behaviors, and school events offer diversity. When
employees have variation in their daily life, they may be less likely to get bored and feel burnt
out in a shorter period of time. The unpredictability and variety of teaching makes it an enjoyable
career for the majority of teachers, because something new happens every day.
Recurring Theme 5: Unsustainability and Void
8 out of 14 participants stated their previous jobs were unsustainable, whether it lacked
sustainability, physically or mentally. Three participants discussed how they did not feel fulfilled
in their previous careers, which prompted them to look for change. Participant 8 claimed, “I
think I always felt there was something else that was drawing me. Something else I needed to be
doing. And teaching was something I had thought about, but didn't act on until then." Participant

Research Sample D 20 of 27

10 also stated that “When I knew I needed to change jobs was when I felt like I always knew a
little bit about a lot of stuff, and I never felt like I was really digging in."
These internal feelings participants went through contributed to their choice to be a
teacher. Realizing they can only do some types of careers for so long, and feeling a general lack
of fulfillment in other careers, helped steer them into the direction to be teachers. Here, they
could constantly help people learn, grow, and fill the void they once had.
The results of this study suggest that there are various extrinsic and intrinsic factors that
motivate individuals to become teachers. The extrinsic factors recognized include physical
unsustainability of previous jobs, exposure to kids, experience teaching in the classroom
environment, and the influence of peers and others. Intrinsic factors included mental
unsustainability of previous jobs, inclination to make a difference, desire to have a more
family-friendly career between personal and professional life, and feeling a lack of fulfillment in
prior career. This supports the study done by Evans (2011) who discovered that individuals left
the career because they had a desire for a more rewarding career, similar to the intrinsic
motivation I identified on individuals' inclination to make a difference. The study by Hogg
(2023) also lines up with my research results as some individuals left their previous career
because they wanted to work with children. The idea of teens versus adults identified in Table 1
goes along with this as well as exposure to kids. For several research participants, they wanted to
be a teacher after being exposed to children through coaching or other jobs.
Implications
As discussed in my introduction, due to the global pandemic in 2020 and the years
following, teachers’ satisfaction plummeted. The conclusions of my research have multiple

Research Sample D 21 of 27

implications for the future of schools. First of all, the findings of my study indicate there are
various, both intrinsic and extrinsic, factors that prompt individuals to become teachers. These
factors do vary from person to person depending on one’s interests; however, there were still
some common denominators that came up for more than half of participants. Administrators,
schools, and superintendents looking for more teachers should appeal to these factors in the
promotion of the career. One of the participants in my study wisely commented, “I don't think
teachers always do the best they can because when people ask what they do, I have heard people
say, ‘well, I'm just a teacher ‘and I think that needs to change because that's kind of sad.” Often,
people overlook teaching as a career because of what it entails and the salary it makes. However,
teachers get several days off during the year, do not work on the weekends or have to do the
same thing everyday, and this career is primarily sustainable long-term. These are the aspects of
teaching that should be advertised and promoted, not the salary. These motivators should be
thought about more in the future when brainstorming how to hire more teachers.
Directions for Future Research
I am curious if this conclusion applies to more than high school level teachers.
Researchers in the future could dive into this topic on a larger scale and look at different levels of
teachers: pre-school, elementary, middle school, etc. Doing so could possibly expand the
conclusion made on high school teachers to all sorts of different teachers. Therefore, this could
have bigger, more vast, implications if similar conclusions were drawn surrounding teachers at
all levels, and evidently, could help mitigate the teacher shortage over time.
Limitations

Research Sample D 22 of 27

It is important to identify possible limitations that could have affected the data. The most
notable limitation was the sample group of high school teachers in northeast Ohio. Since I solely
interviewed teachers at high schools in the northeast Ohio area, my results are only
representative of that population. This means I can not confidently say this data applies to all
teachers, only teachers at the high school level in this area. Another limitation was human error. I
interviewed participants and their responses were based on memories of experiences that
happened years ago. A study on the neuroscience of memory stated that “memory distortions can
occur simply with the passage of time” (Lacy & Stark, 2013, para. 17). Some key events could
have been unintentionally left out of the study purely due to participants’ forgetfulness. It is
recognized that due to the specificity of my interview, the most important events were likely
mentioned. Nonetheless, such an error was possible.
Conclusion
My research study agreed with several past studies: Evans (2011), Lee (2011), Hughes
(2012), Bar-Tal et al. (2020), and Hogg (2023). They shared motivators for second-career
teachers, such as wanting a desirable professional life, unsustainability of previous career,
inclination to make a difference, and passion to work with younger individuals. These
motivations also came up in my study, which indicates that some factors have stayed the same,
even decades later. The extrinsic and intrinsic motivations I identified offered an updated
understanding of how these motivations changed, or for some factors, stayed the same, since the
emergence of the teacher shortage. Because of this, the identified motivations can be used in the
future to appeal to individuals when trying to hire more teachers. Research could also be

Research Sample D 23 of 27

expanded to levels outside of high school, and in turn, hopefully aid in hiring and retaining more
teachers.

Research Sample D 24 of 27

References
Addi-Raccah, A., & Ainhoren, R. (2009). School governance and teachers’ attitudes to parents’
involvement in schools. Teaching and Teacher Education, 25(6), 805–813.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tate.2009.01.006
Andrade, C. (2020). The inconvenient truth about convenience and purposive samples. Indian
Journal of Psychological Medicine, 43(1), 86–88. Sagepub.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0253717620977000
Bar-Tal, S., Chamo, N., Ram, D., Snapir, Z., & Gilat, I. (2020). First steps in a second career:
characteristics of the transition to the teaching profession among novice teachers.
European Journal of Teacher Education, 43(5), 660–675.
https://doi.org/10.1080/02619768.2019.1708895
Börü, N. (2018). The factors affecting teacher-motivation. Acikerisim.nevsehir.edu.tr, 11(4).
http://hdl.handle.net/20.500.11787/2319
Evans, L. (2011). The motivations to enter teaching by age related career stage and certification
path. Sociological Spectrum, 31(5), 606–633.
https://doi.org/10.1080/02732173.2011.589786
Fuller, B., Waite, A., & Irribarra, D. T. (2016). Explaining teacher turnover: School cohesion and
intrinsic motivation in Los Angeles. American Journal of Education, 122(4), 537–567.
https://www.jstor.org/stable/26544509
Hogg, L., Elvira, Q., & Yates, A. (2023). What can teacher educators learn from career-change
teachers’ perceptions and experiences: A systematic literature review. Teaching and
Teacher Education, 132, 104208. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tate.2023.104208

Research Sample D 25 of 27

Hughes, G. D. (2012). Teacher retention: teacher characteristics, school characteristics,
organizational characteristics, and teacher efficacy. The Journal of Educational Research,
105(4), 245–255. https://www.jstor.org/stable/26586936
Khan, D. (2024). The value of prior professional skills and experiences: perceptions of
second-career teachers on JSTOR. Jstor.org.
https://doi.org/10.2307/community.36627829
Klassen, R. M., & Anderson, C. J. K. (2009). How times change: secondary teachers’ job
satisfaction and dissatisfaction in 1962 and 2007. British Educational Research Journal,
35(5), 745–759. http://www.jstor.org/stable/40375634
Lacy, J. W., & Stark, C. E. L. (2013). The Neuroscience of memory: Implications for the
Courtroom. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 14(9), 649–658.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn3563
Lee, D. (2011). Changing course: reflections of second-career teachers. Current Issues in
Education, 14(2). Retrieved from
https://cie.asu.edu/ojs/index.php/cieatasu/article/view/683
Leedy, P.D., & Ormrod, J.E. (2019). Practical Research: Planning and Design, 12th Edition.
Morgan, M., & O’Leary, M. (2004). A study of factors associated with the job satisfaction of
beginning teachers. The Irish Journal of Education / Iris Eireannach an Oideachais, 35,
73–86. http://www.jstor.org/stable/30077496
Ornstein, A. C. (1982). Motivations for teaching. The High School Journal, 66(2), 110–116.
http://www.jstor.org/stable/40365451
Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (2020). Intrinsic and extrinsic motivation from a self-determination

Research Sample D 26 of 27

theory perspective: definitions, theory, practices, and future directions. Contemporary
Educational Psychology, 61(1), 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cedpsych.2020.101860
Schaeffer, K. (2024, September 24). Key facts about public school teachers in the U.S. Retrieved
from Pew Research Center website:
https://www.pewresearch.org/short-reads/2024/09/24/key-facts-about-public-school-teach
ers-in-the-u-s/
Stake, Robert E. (2005) Qualitative case studies. In: Denzin, N.K. and Lincoln, Y.S., Eds., The
Sage Handbook of Qualitative Research, 3rd Edition, Sage Publications, London,
443-466.
Teaching as a Second Career | Fordham Graduate School of Education. (2017). Retrieved March
28, 2025, from Fordham.edu website:
https://www.fordham.edu/graduate-school-of-education/academics/degree-and-certificate
-programs/become-a-teacher/teaching-as-a-second-career/
Tigchelaar, A., Brouwer, N., & Korthagen, F. (2008). Crossing horizons: Continuity and change
during second-career teachers’ entry into teaching. Teaching and Teacher Education,
24(6), 1530–1550. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tate.2008.03.001
UNESCO. (2024). Global report on teachers: addressing teacher shortages and transforming the
profession. In UNESCO eBooks. UNESCO. https://doi.org/10.54675/figu8035
White, S., Bourke, T., Mills, R., Mills, M., van Leent, L., Wood, C., & Readette, M. (2024).
Career change teachers: solving the teacher shortage? European Journal of Teacher
Education, 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1080/02619768.2024.2407546

Research Sample D 27 of 27

Appendix A
Google Form Recruitment Survey
1. What is your name?
2. What is your email?
3. What school do you teach at currently?
4. Have you taught at any other schools in the past?
5. How long have you been teaching (years)?
6. What college(s) did you go to?
7. What was your first profession you worked in following college?
8. Would you be interested in being interviewed as a participant in my AP Research project
surrounding second-career teachers?
List of Interview Questions
1. How long have you been a teacher?
2. What did you major and/or minor in in college?
3. Tell me about your first job after graduating from undergrad.
a. What kinds of responsibilities did you have?
b. Describe a typical day in that job.
4. Can you please describe the differences between your previous job and teaching?
5. What are the similarities between your previous job and teaching?
a. If they say no similarities - that’s fine. Say “tell me more about that” or “what
makes it so different?”
6. Have you worked in any other fields besides teaching and your first career?
[follow up with similarities/differences again for the other career - questions 4 and 5]
7. After how many years in your previous profession(s) did you decide to become a teacher?
8. Is there a specific reason you left your previous profession?
9. What would you consider to be the biggest incentive or motivation for you to become a
teacher?
10. Was teaching something you ever considered as a student in high school or college? Tell
me about that process.
11. What is the most enjoyable part of your career as a teacher now?
12. Do you miss anything about your previous career?
13. Would you ever consider leaving teaching to do something else? If so, what?

AP RESEARCH 2025 • SCORING COMMENTARY

Academic Paper
Note: Student samples are quoted verbatim and may contain spelling and grammatical errors.
Overview
NEW for 2025: The question overviews can be found in the Chief Reader Report on Student Responses on
AP Central.
Sample: D
Score: 4
This paper earns a score of 4. In topic, this paper seeks to explore what motivates people to take
up teaching as a second career. The research objective is stated as, “I am trying to gain a new
understanding of what factors drew teachers who pursued non-traditional career paths into education”
(p.2). This leads to the research question: “what are the extrinsic and intrinsic factors that drew current
teachers, who did not major in education in undergrad, to pursue a career in teaching at the high school
level?” (p. 3; repeated on p. 7).
This paper does not earn a score of 3 because the gap is previewed in the introductory paragraph and
defended on p. 7. Additionally, the paper defends the methodological approach (a phenomenological case
study employing semi-structured interviews with 14 second-career teachers, aged from 27 to early 60s)
on p. 9. The use of semi-structured interviews with second-career HS teachers is well-aligned with the
RQ, and there is sufficient evidence to answer that RQ in the “findings” section on pp. 10 - 20.
This paper does not earn a score of 5, however, because the limitations and implications are
oversimplified. In terms of limitations, for example, on p. 22 the paper acknowledges the possibility of
human error among interviewees when recalling their experiences but does not address the possibility
of human error on the part of the researcher when performing the thematic analysis. In terms of
implications, for example, on p. 21 it states that by examining the motivations of pre-school, elementary,
middle school teachers, “…bigger, more vast, implications if similar conclusions were drawn… ” but
these implications were not stated. Taken together this paper represents a well-supported, articulate
argument conveying a new understanding.

© 2025 College Board.

Visit College Board on the web: collegeboard.org.	

