2025

AP Research
Academic Paper
®

Sample Student Responses
and Scoring Commentary

Inside:
Sample H
☑5 Scoring Guidelines
☑5 Student Samples
☑5 Scoring Commentary

© 2025 College Board. College Board, Advanced Placement, AP, AP Central, and the acorn logo are registered trademarks of
College Board. AP Capstone is a trademark owned by College Board. Visit College Board on the web: collegeboard.org.
AP Central is the official online home for the AP Program: apcentral.collegeboard.org.

AP® Research 2025 Scoring Guidelines

Academic Paper

5 Points

Report on Existing Knowledge

Report on Existing Knowledge
with Simplistic Use of a Research
Method

Score of 2

Score of 3

Ineffectual Argument for a New
Understanding

Well-Supported, Articulate
Argument Conveying a New
Understanding

Score of 4

Score of 5

• Presents an overly broad topic of
inquiry.

• Presents a topic of inquiry with
narrowing scope or focus, that is
NOT carried through either in the
method or in the overall line of
reasoning.

• Carries the focus or scope of a
topic of inquiry through the
method AND overall line of
reasoning, even though the focus
or scope might still be narrowing.

• Focuses a topic of inquiry with
clear and narrow parameters,
which are addressed through the
method and the conclusion.

• Focuses a topic of inquiry with
clear and narrow parameters,
which are addressed through the
method and the conclusion.

• Situates a topic of inquiry within
a single perspective derived from
scholarly works OR through a
variety of perspectives derived
from mostly non-scholarly works.

• Situates a topic of inquiry within
a single perspective derived from
scholarly works OR through a
variety of perspectives derived
from mostly non-scholarly works.

• Situates a topic of inquiry within
relevant scholarly works of
varying perspectives, although
connections to some works may
be unclear

• Explicitly connects a topic of
inquiry to relevant scholarly
works of varying perspectives
AND logically explains how the
topic of inquiry addresses a gap.

• Explicitly connects a topic of
inquiry to relevant scholarly
works of varying perspectives
AND logically explains how the
topic of inquiry addresses a gap.

• Describes a search and report
process.

• Describes a nonreplicable
research method OR provides an
oversimplified description of a
method, with questionable
alignment to the purpose of the
inquiry.

• Describes a reasonably replicable
research method, with
questionable alignment to the
purpose of the inquiry.

• Logically defends the alignment
of a detailed, replicable research
method to the purpose of the
inquiry

• Logically defends the alignment
of a detailed, replicable research
method to the purpose of the
inquiry.

• Summarizes or reports existing
knowledge in the field of
understanding pertaining to the
topic of inquiry.

• Summarizes or reports existing
knowledge in the field of
understanding pertaining to the
topic of inquiry.

• Conveys a new understanding or
conclusion, with an
underdeveloped line of reasoning
OR insufficient evidence.

• Supports a new understanding or
conclusion through a logically
organized line of reasoning AND
sufficient evidence. The
limitations and/or implications, if
present, of the new
understanding or conclusion are
oversimplified.

• Justifies a new understanding or
conclusion through a logical
progression of inquiry choices,
sufficient evidence, explanation
of the limitations of the
conclusion, and an explanation of
the implications to the
community of practice.

• Generally communicates the
student’s ideas, although errors
in grammar, discipline-specific
style, and organization distract or
confuse the reader.

• Generally communicates the
student’s ideas, although errors
in grammar, discipline-specific
style, and organization distract or
confuse the reader.

• Competently communicates the
student’s ideas, although there
may be some errors in grammar,
discipline-specific style, and
organization.

• Competently communicates the
student’s ideas, although there
may be some errors in grammar,
discipline-specific style, and
organization.

• Enhances the communication of
the student’s ideas through
organization, use of design
elements, conventions of
grammar, style, mechanics, and
word precision, with few to no
errors.

• Cites AND/OR attributes sources
(in bibliography/ works cited
and/or intext), with multiple
errors and/or an inconsistent use
of a discipline specific style.

• Cites AND/OR attributes sources
(in bibliography/ works cited
and/or intext), with multiple
errors and/or an inconsistent use
of a discipline specific style.

• Cites AND attributes sources,
using a discipline-specific style (in
both bibliography/works cited
AND intext), with few errors or
inconsistencies.

• Cites AND attributes sources,
with a consistent use of an
appropriate discipline-specific
style (in both bibliography/works
cited AND intext), with few to no
errors.

• Cites AND attributes sources,
with a consistent use of an
appropriate discipline-specific
style (in both bibliography/works
cited AND intext), with few to no
errors.

Score of 1

Rich Analysis of a New
Understanding Addressing a Gap
in the Research Base

© 2025 College Board

Research Sample H 1 of 14

Thrombolysis and Frostbite: A Systematic Review
AP Research
Word count:3119

Research Sample H 2 of 14

Abstract
The purpose of this paper is to provide a contribution of new knowledge to the current pool of
medical research involving thrombolysis’ effect on frostbite recovery. In order to do this a
content analysis of existing case studies and literature will be performed. The content analysis is
designed to be as unbiased as possible through the use of almost entirely quantitative data and
through the use of a standardizing tool called PRISMA. PRISMA ( Preferred Reporting Items for
Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis). PRISMA provided a standard that is used by other
researchers that allowed me to add a great deal of credibility to my research. While researching
another paper it cited PRISMA as a resource and this led me to research it and to decide to use it
to enhance my paper. PRISMA allowed me to greatly reduce the amount of bias in my research
paper and I would highly recommend it to future researchers. I did not follow the guidelines
perfectly as they were designed for Meta-Analysis but as far as my research got I did use it. I
used a series of inclusion and exclusion criteria in order to determine what case studies and
literature to include in my data collection. After collecting data the data will be used to analyze
the research question To what extent does the effectiveness of thrombolysis with frostbite differ
between young adults and middle aged people. The most important data that will be collected is
the age of the patients and the data used to determine how effective the thrombolysis treatment
is. In order to determine this the data collected will be as follows: The degree of frostbite and
then the amount of extremities, in this case likely fingers and toes, that had to be amputated due
to the extent of the frostbite injuries. Using this criteria and method a research process will entail.
My hypothesis is that thrombolysis will be a more effective treatment for young adults than for
middle aged people. The results of the paper will be outlined in a data table that will likely show
a clear difference between the effectiveness of the thrombolysis treatment. Ideally this will

Research Sample H 3 of 14

involve data points from at least 50-100 cases from various case studies and other literature.
These case studies and reports will be pulled from pubmed and google scholar sources.

Literature review:
Frostbite is defined as “a local tissue injury caused by cold exposure with freezing”.
(Regli et al., 2023a) It has an extremely high morbidity as it can occur anywhere that there are
substances or environments that have a cold temperature. Frostbite also commonly occurs with
people who are intoxicated or have otherwise impaired judgement. It can be caused by a variety
of conditions including excessive cold, excessive wind and a high humidity level that, when
combined, can create an environment that is highly hazardous to the human body. When faced
with these threats for a prolonged period of time the body can cool to a dangerous temperature. It
responds by taking the warm blood from extremities and bringing it closer to the core in order to
keep the vital organs healthy.(Drinane et al., 2019) This “sacrifice” of the outer extremities is
often necessary to keep vital organs intact and functioning but can cause the freezing of body
tissue which in many cases can be extremely harmful as “Intra and extracellular ice formation
cause electrolyte and pH shifts as well as cell membrane disruption, resulting in cell death and
tissue destruction”(Regli et al., 2023a). In order to treat frozen tissue effectively, medical
attention is needed as soon as possible. The longer that it takes for medical attention to be
provided the more likely that lasting damage will occur. For a very long time the best known
treatment for frostbite was “tissue rewarming, prolonged watchful waiting, and often delayed
amputation”(Lee & Higgins, 2020) This treatment is effective in the sense that it does save lives
and was the best treatment for a very long time but the common result of delayed amputation
leaves a lot of room for improvement by modern medicine. In order to protect itself “The body

Research Sample H 4 of 14

responds to such cold-related thermal insults with alternating cycles of vasoconstriction and
vasodilation”(Lee & Higgins, 2020). While it is beneficial for the body as the whole this is
detrimental to the bodily tissue involved. During the stage of rewarming the extent of this
damage becomes apparent and due to the nature of rewarming numerous ailments can and likely
will result from the tissue being rewarmed and being reintroduced to blood flow after a period
without it. (Regli et al., 2023a). Much of the time blood flow to these affected areas does not
come easily even after the rewarming of tissue. In the majority of cases that proper medical care
is available more treatment than just rapid rewarming is necessary. After the period of prolonged
observation it will become obvious whether or not the patient needs further treatment. In many
cases amputation of affected extremities becomes necessary in order to preserve the life of the
patient. The amputation of extremities can severely affect a person's quality of life and can
possibly or even likely become traumatic for the patient.(Drinane et al., 2019) However, a
substantial amount of research is showing that thrombolysis is a viable and beneficial option to
help reduce the incidence of amputation of extremities (Zhang et al., 2019).Thrombolysis is a
very general definition but for the purpose of this study I will only be examining papers that
make use of IV thrombolysis. Trans-catheter is also a viable option for thrombolysis but is used
less with frostbite as it is less effective. As seen in Lee and Higgins study the most common
option to identify the need of thrombolysis is an Angiography with the second most common
option being a bone scan. (Lee et al., 2019). An angiography is a medical test where a special
dye called a contrast is injected into an artery in the area of the body to be studied and an X-Ray
is taken of that part of the body. The contrast allows for the blood flow in the area to show up on
an X-ray so that the extent of the frostbite damage may be studied. (Extremity Angiography:
MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia, n.d.)

Research Sample H 5 of 14

There are numerous studies that I found that were similar to my own study as they share
similar methods and a similar interest in frostbite. Most of those studies focused almost
exclusively on the general effectiveness of thrombolytics such as tPA. These papers evaluated the
effectiveness of thrombolysis by using the number of extremities amputated and the kind of
treatment that they received. They did not evaluate any variables except for the success and fail
of the treatment and the kind of treatment. None of these studies evaluated any kinds of variables
such as differences in patients' ages or ethnicities. This left a gap that could be filled by further
research by another researcher. I chose to fill this gap by imitating their methods but isolating a
different variable in patient ages. These studies were extremely helpful with the making of my
paper as they provided inspiration for my topics and showed me the most effective way to study
the topic that I eventually decided to take my time and study. Each of the aforementioned studies
were peer reviewed and came from respected databases. This helped to ensure that my basis of
research was strong and helped to reduce the likelihood of the possibility that my research
foundation was flawed. One such study was called Frostbite Treatment: a systematic review with
meta-analysis. This study also followed the guidelines outlined in the PRISMA study. This study
had a similar method and topic to the research study that I decided to do. It was written by
medical professionals who have a great deal of experience with frostbite and have medical
degrees. This study evaluated the effectiveness of thrombolysis treatment in general and while it
did also have data points that showed the difference of effectiveness between males and females
it did not show the differences between any other variable. It also showed the use of multiple
kinds of thrombolytics and it showed how effective each one was.
Gap in existing research

Research Sample H 6 of 14

While there are many studies that show how effective thrombolysis is in the general
public there are no studies that compare the effectiveness of thrombolysis between middle aged
people, aged 40-59, and young adults, aged 18 to 25.

Assumptions
In this study I make a series of assumptions such as I assume that there is an obvious difference
in the effectiveness of thrombolysis with middle aged people and young adults, I assume that
thrombolysis is used in a similar fashion with both parties, I assume that the patients will have a
similar enough nature of injury that the results will be comparable, and I assume that there will
be no overlap in the patient data used in the studies that I will be using.

Significance
This study has the potential to impact how doctors treat patients of different age groups. Ideally
this study will show that there is a possible difference in the effectiveness of the treatment of
frostbite with thrombolytics between the two age groups. If it does show that then it can provide
another part to the larger research of thrombolytic effectiveness and hopefully contribute some
knowledge for further researchers. If my hypothesis is proven correct and further research is
established it is possible that the age of the patient may provide further consideration for the
doctor to decide whether or not to prescribe thrombolytics. Understanding this new difference
could influence a doctors decision on whether or not to provide the patient with thrombolytic
treatment and it could influence the result of the treatment. The results of the treatment could be
life changing for those patients that receive it.

Research Sample H 7 of 14

Method
I will perform a quantitative content analysis on 50 medical research papers or case
studies that include patient data summarizing their Age, injuries, treatment and the outcome of
said treatment. In order to reduce the possibility of bias in this study and to ensure that it is as
professional as possible I chose to follow the guidelines of the Preferred Reporting Items for
Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis (PRISMA–www.prisma-statement.org). This provides a
standardized outline for the creation of a systematic review and will help to ensure that I am not
biased and that the creation of this paper is as professional as possible. While bias is largely
unavoidable a standardized approach will help to minimize it and allow for a better overall paper.
Using a proven method or a standardized approach allows you to use a time tested method that
has already been proven. PRISMA is overseen by two professors from Monash University.
During the course of this study I will get each of the papers or case studies from either Google
Scholar, or Pubmed. Ideally I would include Elseviers medical database as well but due to
limited access Elseviers database and case studies were not included in the research process.
Exclusion Criteria
In order to ensure that the data that I found would provide only the data that I needed I chose to
exclude some papers or patient data that had insufficient information for my research. In order to
do this I chose to exclude data from patients with severe comorbidities, patients that had injuries
that involved flash freezing incidents that may have been caused by dry ice or liquid nitrogen and
patients who were not in the correct age group. The treatments for these injuries are not the same
treatments as for general frostbite and those said treatments would likely affect the outcome of
the thrombolytic treatment and would damage the integrity of the study. These factors may also

Research Sample H 8 of 14

influence whether or not a patient would receive thrombolysis, again affecting the integrity of the
study.
Inclusion Criteria
For the purpose of this study I chose to include only the necessary data. This includes the
patient's age, body parts involved, frostbite grade, hospital treatment and outcome. The data that
is the patients age provides the basis of this research project. The difference of effectiveness of
the frostbite is the research part of the research project. The body parts that are most commonly
affected by frostbite are the extremities that give off the most heat and are the farthest from the
core. These are most often the hands and feet, or more specifically the fingers and the toes. The
number of these affected digits and the outcome of the treatment will be collected and put in a
table that is meant to detail the effectiveness of the treatment. The frostbite grade is another point
of data that will help to add context and relevance to this study. It will allow for the
categorization of the injuries to be shown in the table next to the results so that they can be seen
side by side and can help add context to it. The frostbite grade can also be a factor that helps to
determine whether or not an individual patient is selected to undergo the process of thrombolysis
in addition to the rest of the necessary treatment. The frostbite grade can be determined by the
depth of the frostbite injury in relation to the skin. The depth of the frozen tissue in the affected
areas will determine the grade of the aforementioned frostbite. The hospital treatment is also
definitely a massive factor in the data for this research project. Generally in this research method
the point is to isolate a variable to allow it to be studied but treatment almost definitely will vary
in quality and form from hospital to hospital. A patient could possibly be taken care of in a small
hospital or emergency care center or when possible they could be sent to a burn center that
specializes in treating injuries that have a similar likeness to frostbite injuries. While this is not

Research Sample H 9 of 14

the focus of the study it can also be a significant factor that influences the outcome of each
individual patients recovery from their injuries. The outcome is the culmination of all of these
other factors. In most cases this is the main point of data that will determine whether or not the
treatment of the patient was effective. The outcome can end up being several different things but
the most common results will likely be either a full or partial amputation that would show that
the treatment was not effective or it could be a full recovery or an eventual recovery that would
be shown as an effective treatment in the context of this study. Each of these factors will be
essential to the research method and the results of this study as each of these factors are directly
related.

Limitations
When I was studying this topic I ran into a few limitations that provided obstacles to the
research process. I found that much of the research and studies that I used were based in America
limiting the diversity of the project. Another limitation is that many of the medical research
databases that i found that had the case studies that contained the data necessary for my study
required a sign-in as part of an organization, such as a hospital or university. As I have yet to be a
part of either of those things gaining access to any of those databases proved to be impossible.
Advice
I would advise future researchers to expand on my research by incorporating more research
databases from a larger variety of sources. Specifically sources from different parts of the world
and places that have different standards of medical care. As my sources largely came from
American sources I feel that if someone were to expand that to sources from places such as
Russia, China, Norway, or other places in the world that have a significant amount of frostbite

Research Sample H 10 of 14

they could gain a greater understanding of frostbite treatment in places all over the world. They
could also do studies based in places that generally don’t get cold enough to have frostbite but
for some reason with the weather they have an influx of cases. The effectiveness of thrombolysis
with those that are unaccustomed to cold could be an interesting variable that could produce yet
another research project. Another item I feel would greatly add to the topic is how the
effectiveness of thrombolysis with frostbite differs with multiple ethnicities. The variations of
demographics that would affect this topic that can be studied are extremely numerous and would
take much time and effort to study but would produce much data that could be profitable to the
medical community, specifically those that specialize in burn care. This would also be especially
important to the patients that would be affected by the results of the data.
Results
I am hypothesizing that the results of this study will be that thrombolysis is more effective in
young adults than in middle aged people. The results of this study will be in a table format with a
section for Young adults and for Middle aged people. There would be numbers of patients with
each previously outlined data point included. Then the percentage of amputations for each
section, along with the considerations of frostbite grade will be shown at the end. These two
percentages will be the basis for the new understanding of whether or not the treatment was
effective. My hypothesis that there will be an obvious difference very well may be entirely
wrong but even if that happens then this research project is still a beneficial study. The
understanding that there is a negligible difference could be just as important as the understanding
that there is not a difference between the effectiveness of thrombolysis with frostbite between
young adults and middle aged people. While the method outlined in this study was regrettably
not performed this avenue of research is still very viable and could later be performed when

Research Sample H 11 of 14

more resources are available. The ability to have access to the necessary data points is very
valuable and is not something that I gained access to.
Conclusion
While this research project is deficient as it does not provide a new understanding of the
topic nor does it provide viable research it does have a strong foundation. This basis for a
research project is something that is still valuable to the research field primarily as a lit review.
This research project was not a failure and is something that provided a great deal of insight and
learning to the researcher involved. This research project could provide valuable insight into the
field of frostbite treatment.

Research Sample H 12 of 14

Works Cited
angiography. (2025). In Merriam-Webster Dictionary.
https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/angiography
Bruen KJ, Ballard JR, Morris SE, Cochran A, Edelman LS, Saffle JR. Reduction of the incidence
of amputation in frostbite injury with thrombolytic therapy. Arch Surg. 2007
Jun;142(6):546-51; discussion 551-3. doi: 10.1001/archsurg.142.6.546. PMID:
17576891.
Carmichael H, Michel S, Smith TM, Duffy PS, Wiktor AJ, Lambert Wagner A. Remote Delivery
of Thrombolytics Prior to Transfer to a Regional Burn Center for Tissue Salvage in
Frostbite: A Single-center Experience of 199 Patients. J Burn Care Res. 2022 Jan
5;43(1):54-60. doi: 10.1093/jbcr/irab041. PMID: 33657205.
Cauchy, E., Cheguillaume, B., & Chetaille, E. (2011). A controlled trial of a prostacyclin and
RT-PA in the treatment of severe frostbite. New England Journal of Medicine, 364(2),
189–190. https://doi.org/10.1056/nejmc1000538
Extremity angiography: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia. (n.d.).
https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/003772.htm
Heard J, Shamrock A, Galet C, Pape KO, Laroia S, Wibbenmeyer L. Thrombolytic Use in
Management of Frostbite Injuries: Eight Year Retrospective Review at a Single
Institution. J Burn Care Res. 2020 May 2;41(3):722-726. doi: 10.1093/jbcr/iraa028.
PMID: 32030427.
James Drinane, Vasanth S Kotamarti, Casey O’Connor, Lakshmi Nair, Alex Divanyan, Malcolm
Z Roth, Ashit Patel, Joseph A Ricci, Thrombolytic Salvage of Threatened Frostbitten

Research Sample H 13 of 14

Extremities and Digits: A Systematic Review, Journal of Burn Care & Research, Volume
40, Issue 5, September/October 2019, Pages 541–549, https://doi.org/10.1093/jbcr/irz097
Lee, J., & Higgins, M. C. S. S. (2020). What Interventional Radiologists Need to know about
Managing Severe Frostbite: A Meta-Analysis of Thrombolytic Therapy. American
Journal of Roentgenology, 214(4), 930–937. https://doi.org/10.2214/ajr.19.21592
NCI Dictionary of Cancer Terms. (n.d.). Cancer.gov.
https://www.cancer.gov/publications/dictionaries/cancer-terms/def/thrombolysis
Page, M. J., McKenzie, J. E., Bossuyt, P. M., Boutron, I., Hoffmann, T. C., Mulrow, C. D.,
Shamseer, L., Tetzlaff, J. M., Akl, E. A., Brennan, S. E., Chou, R., Glanville, J.,
Grimshaw, J. M., Hróbjartsson, A., Lalu, M. M., Li, T., Loder, E. W., Mayo-Wilson, E.,
McDonald, S., . . . Moher, D. (2021). The PRISMA 2020 statement: an updated guideline
for reporting systematic reviews. BMJ, n71. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.n71
Paine, R. E., Turner, E. N., Kloda, D., Falank, C., Chung, B., & Carter, D. W. (2020). Protocoled
thrombolytic therapy for frostbite improves phalangeal salvage rates. Burns & Trauma, 8.
https://doi.org/10.1093/burnst/tkaa008
Patel, N., Srinivasa, D. R., Srinivasa, R. N., Gemmete, J. J., Krishnamurthy, V., Dasika, N.,
Reddy, S. N., Osher, M. L., Sears, E. D., & Chick, J. F. B. (2017). Intra-arterial
thrombolysis for extremity frostbite decreases digital amputation rates and hospital length
of stay. CardioVascular and Interventional Radiology, 40(12), 1824–1831.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00270-017-1729-7
Regli, I. B., Oberhammer, R., Zafren, K., Brugger, H., & Strapazzon, G. (2023). Frostbite
treatment: a systematic review with meta-analyses. Scandinavian Journal of Trauma

Research Sample H 14 of 14

Resuscitation and Emergency Medicine, 31(1).
https://doi.org/10.1186/s13049-023-01160-3
Sean Hickey, Amy Whitson, Larry Jones, Lucy Wibbenmeyer, Colleen Ryan, Ryan Fey, Jeffrey
Litt, Renata Fabia, Lee Cancio, William Mohr, John Twomey, Anne Wagner, Amalia
Cochran, J Kevin Bailey, Guidelines for Thrombolytic Therapy for Frostbite, Journal of
Burn Care & Research, Volume 41, Issue 1, January/February 2020, Pages 176–183,
https://doi.org/10.1093/jbcr/irz148
Tawfik, G. M., Dila, K. a. S., Mohamed, M. Y. F., Tam, D. N. H., Kien, N. D., Ahmed, A. M., &
Huy, N. T. (2019). A step by step guide for conducting a systematic review and
meta-analysis with simulation data. Tropical Medicine and Health, 47(1).
https://doi.org/10.1186/s41182-019-0165-6
Teresa P. Gonzaga, Kamrun Jenabzadeh, Christopher P. Anderson, William J. Mohr, Frederick
W. Endorf, David H. Ahrenholz, Use of Intra-arterial Thrombolytic Therapy for Acute
Treatment of Frostbite in 62 Patients with Review of Thrombolytic Therapy in Frostbite,
Journal of Burn Care & Research, Volume 37, Issue 4, July-August 2016, Pages
e323–e334, https://doi.org/10.1097/BCR.0000000000000245
Tucker, M. E. (2008). Thrombolytic therapy saves frostbitten limbs. In Trauma HOSPITALIST
NEWS. https://cdn.mdedge.com/files/s3fs-public/issues/articles/70084_main_32.pdf
Zhang JL, Fu JX, Yuan K, Yuan B, Wang MQ. [Advances in the research of transcatheter arterial
thrombolysis for severe frostbite therapy]. Zhonghua Shao Shang Za Zhi. 2019 Jan
20;35(1):74-76. Chinese. doi: 10.3760/cma.j.issn.1009-2587.2019.01.015. PMID: 30678407.

AP RESEARCH 2025 • SCORING COMMENTARY

Academic Paper
Note: Student samples are quoted verbatim and may contain spelling and grammatical errors.
Overview
NEW for 2025: The question overviews can be found in the Chief Reader Report on Student Responses on
AP Central.
Sample: H
Score: 2
This paper earns a score of 2. The research question is found on p. 6: “... [to] compare the effectiveness
of thrombolysis between middle aged people, aged 40-59, and young adults, aged 18 to 25.” This
question is situated in a literature review of mostly scholarly sources. A method is described on p. 7: “...a
quantitative content analysis on 50 medical research papers or case studies that include patient data
summarizing their Age, injuries, treatment and the outcome of said treatment.” Part of content analysis is
to develop sample selection criteria. Exclusion criteria and inclusion criteria for what studies to include
in the systematic review are described on pp. 7-8: “ I will get each of the papers or case studies from
either Google Scholar, or Pubmed” and “This includes the patient’s age, body parts involved, frostbite
grade, hospital treatment and outcome.” The inclusion of the selection criteria demonstrates limited
use of the method as part of the coding development. The method was not carried out beyond this step,
and thus the only results presented are hypothetical (p. 10). The paper as a whole is a report on existing
knowledge with simplistic use of a method.
This paper does not earn a score of 1. The methods described go beyond a search and report method.
There is a narrowing scope about thrombolysis and simplistic method use.
This paper does earn a score of 3. The presented hypothesized results are on p. 10 which do not
competently convey a new understanding. The communication is general and not competent. For
example, PRISMA is introduced on p. 5 but not explained until p. 7.

© 2025 College Board.

Visit College Board on the web: collegeboard.org.	

