Killing animals isn't art
Have you thought about animals poaching? Or on animals being used for art. I bet it
hasn't gone through your mind until right now that I brought it up. Well in the world specifically
in Africa Rhinoceros poaching is still at crisis levels according to the south African government.
Last year there were 1,028 rhinos illegally killed. “ rhino population is still in critical danger”
stated by an author at the national geographic. Africa is home to 80 percent of the worlds
29,000 rhinos. This is the third year that the poaching of rhinos has dropped compared to other
years, but there are still being hunted and killed for their horns.
Rhino horns are in demand in, especially in Vietnam. Possibly because of their medical
value. They're capable of anything from curing cancer to being used as alcohol. What is a
rhino horn made out of? the horn is made out of keratin, same as hair and fingernails. But most
of all Rhino horn is increasingly being used for work of art. “There have been 21 government
officials that had been arrested for poaching-related crimes in 2017” Edna Mole a South Africa
environment minister stated in a press release.
What are government officials doing to solve this? Not much but they have started
somewhere. they have banned crossing borders with rhino horns, buying and selling within
South Africa has been prohibited. BUT there was a court ruling in April that there was a lawsuit
happening by a rhino farmer named John home who owns about 1,500. Made the domestic
moratorium be lifted. In August, there was an auction held by home to sell his stockpiled of
rhino horns. He gets these horns by cutting them off with a chainsaw. It can be painless if done
right. Auctions like this can lead on to illegal trade of horns internationally in black markets.

Visit the College Board on the web: collegeboard.org.

Kruger national park, that was a poaching hot spot has now decreased its poaching by
24 percent, this is an attributed to an anti-poaching park they train their rangers and have
improved radio communication, and also use train dog to track suspected poachers over a
long distance. In other words, rhino poaching has increased.
But in other hands rhino poaching in KwaZulu-natal country the numbers of poaching
has increased by 50 percent over the past year.
In Africa, 502 alleged rhino poachers and 16 traffickers have been arrested in 2017 (
government press release states). But the other countries have not yet released anything on
capturing/arresting any poachers.
Rhinos are not the only animals being poached in Africa. There are giraffe, lions, one of the
most recent poaching done that was made public was about “killing of the African giraffe”.
There was a photograph that included a picture of a woman pointing to the sky while she was
next to the animal corpse during a trip took in June 2017. Some even go as far as blaming the
animal's age for there killing. Or there killing of other animals. Or they go on a hunting trip to
play a game of hunting animals and taking there some body part of the animal as a trophy as if
they won something huge.
Ok maybe the rhino's horn can save someone life from cancer but why not wait for the
animal to die in natural causes or try to recreate the rhino horn we know what it made of. why
not make it yourself we could probably make it better but butting a animals population at risk
just to make it's into alcohol that a no to save someone ones like ok we will understand but to
use it to make cocktails. Is that really what we humans turned into? turning animals into
alcohol just so you can get drunk you're putting an animal life at risk their species at risk just

Visit the College Board on the web: collegeboard.org.

for a drink? Us human really doesn't care about animals. Let's do this put yourself in a rhinos
place or a giraffe or a lion or an elephant does are the animals being poached for art. Yes for
art.
Reflection on this. Animal poaching needs to stop no matter what the needs are
because these animals are suffering what they shouldn't be suffering. Just for a horn piece
hanging in a person's wall, or for a drink. No animal deserves to suffer like this. Or kill animals
just for your amuse to take it home as a trophy as if you deserve something to reward you-you
killed an animal you should be rewarded by going to jail even though that won't bring the
animal back but it will show that the poaching of animals will not be tolerated.
Word count 825

Visit the College Board on the web: collegeboard.org.

Works Cited
​
Agancy
france. “ This Article Is More than 4 Years Old Elephant Poaching: Thousands March
Worldwide for Wildlife Protection.” ​The Guardian ​, 4 Oct. 2014,
www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/oct/05/elephant-poaching-thousands-march-wor
ldwide-for-wildlife-protection.​
Hauser, Christine. “Killing of African Giraffe Sets Off Anger at ‘White American Savage’ Who
Shot It.” The
​
New York Times​, 3 July 2018,
www.nytimes.com/2018/07/03/world/africa/woman-kills-giraffe.html.​
“The Big Five: Africa's Most Sought-After Trophy Animals.” ​The New York Times​, 10 Aug.
2015,
www.nytimes.com/interactive/2015/08/10/world/africa/africa-big-game-hunting.html

Visit the College Board on the web: collegeboard.org.