The Effects o f Sports and Physical Exercise on Prisoner Sociability

Individual Written Argument

To What Extent Do Sports and Physical Activity Improve the Sociability o f lnmates in the
United States and Canada?

Word Count: 2200

Introduction

Out of the 10 million people incarcerated around the globe, one quarter are in North
America, with the United States specifically having the highest prison rate with 655 prisoners per
100,000 of the national population (Institute for Criminal Policy Research). Even with the trend
of an increasing prison population in both the United States and Canada, sports and recreational
activities have been substantially declining, due to a decrease in spending in both countries since
the 2000s. According to Mark Norman, a postdoctoral fellow at McMaster University, the shift
in the Canadian corrections system, under the leadership of Prime Minister Stephen Harper,
created a “tough-on-crime” agenda on prisons that coupled reduced budgets on prison operation
with harsher conditions of confinement and longer prison sentences (Norman). In the United
States, according to a survey conducted by an organization made up o f hundreds o f researchers
and advocates called the Vera Institute of Justice, “20 out of the 45 responding states managed to
decrease their spending” (“Trends in Prison Population and Spending: 2010-2015”). Even if
policymakers assume a direct relationship between prison population and spending in
correctional institutions, believing that a decline in prison population registers a decline in
spending, such policies still erode a necessary component of prison life in its recreational
programs and interest in sports activities. When inmates are placed into a finite area on lockdown
and cannot leave their cells, the availability of exercise equipment or recreational spaces is
essential for the preservation of their mental and physical well-being, which betters social skills
as well. This, however, is only one perspective offered in the field, as while some experts agree
that there are tangible reasons for prisons to include sports— specifically team sports— and
physical activity due to the benefits of reduced aggression and rehabilitation, others argue the
direct opposite, stating that a higher level of physical health is related to a higher likelihood of

recidivism. In this discussion, to what extent do sports and physical activity improve the
sociability of inmates in the United States and Canada?

Overall, although sports and a higher level of physical health may increase hegemonic
masculinity or lead prisoners to reoffend, these detriments are outweighed by the benefits of
sports and physical activities due to claims that it reduces aggression, rehabilitates prisoners
struggling with addiction or behavioral problems, and empowers inmates during their time
behind bars. Therefore, these beneficial social impacts are not only seen in prison in the short
term, but also help inmates reintegrate into society in the long term.

The Benefits of Sports on Sociability

Recreational team sports can help rehabilitate inmates due to allowing prisoners to cope
with their social environments through engaging in collective social events. A joumal article
found in the Journal of Sport History published by the University of Illinois found that prison
baseball at the Eastern State Penitentiary provided prisoners with a sense of autonomy in a
carceral culture that threatened to deny them of it. Providing historical context, the 2007 study
found that in the 20th century, the penitentiary recognized a need for team sports as a means to
rehabilitate inmates after discovering that the ideal of isolation and non-interaction did not aid
towards rehabilitation. Originally, the 1913 Warden’s Association championed the introduction
o f recreational activities, including baseball, for prisoners to “gain a sense of camaraderie and
enjoyment” (Haybum). Baseball, especially, embodied the virtues that Progressive reformers
wished to instill in inmates, transforming them from “dangerous classes” to “Christian
gentlemen” and improving both the physical and mental conditions of inmates. Being a team
sport, the benefits o f baseball in unification were also described as a “wholesome, democratizing

influence” that “ [destroyed] artificial distinctions between man and man” (Haybum). Although
these findings are based in the 20th century, the physical and behavioral benefits discussed are
timeless and universal in team sports. In the Eastern State Penitentiary, baseball remained a
constant for inmates as they struggled to cope with a new environment, remaining as a cheerful
recreational activity for many o f the prisoners.

These same benefits were also seen in the case of Huwe Burton, a man wrongfully
incarcerated for murder and later exonerated in 2019. According to The Spectator, a British
magazine publishing articles in topics such as politics, culture, and current affairs, Burton
noticed that inmates found solace in running regularly and joined in to run with them, finding his
“own sense of freedom” as a result (Kraus). By doing so, his interest in running also helped him
mentally heal, survive prison, and later caused him to compete in the NYC marathon. The impact
of prison recreation on Burton’s life is clear, as in addition to physical and mental health
benefits, finding company while running allowed Burton to socially connect with other inmates.
Citing the book Sport in Prison written by Rosie Meek, a chartered psychologist and prison
researcher, Kraus writes that participation in sport and physical activity may decrease
probabilities of inmates engaging in deviant behavior “by providing virtuous forms of
socialization, excitement and risk” (Kraus). Moreover, Mark Norman, having a research focus in
the physical culture of Canadian prisons, offers other benefits to sports in contributing to the
prison lifestyle, stating that sports are “mandated by policymakers and deployed by prison
administrators in order to achieve particular outcomes in the inmate population, such as reduced
aggression or vague rehabilitative goals” (Norman). All of these benefits directly connect with
the sociability of prisoners, as a reduction in aggression allows inmates to better connect with
one another and with individuals once outside of prison, increasing sociability.

In terms of the effects physical activity has on offenders in rehabilitative programs,
exercise can also substantially help prisoners who struggle with addiction or have behavioral
problems. Studying the relationship between physical activity and offender attitudes in
rehabilitative programs in American prisons, a joumal article published in the Journal of
Correctional Education, a publication created by educators and administrators who work in adult
and juvenile corrections settings, concluded that positive benefits arise from exercise for
offenders in the rehabilitative process. Utilizing data based strictly on inmates’ self-perception of
their physical and mental conditions, the study implemented a moderate exercise routine with
varied sets of aerobic and anaerobic exercises, such as stretches, push-ups,jum pingjacks and
jogging. Physical exercise had directly improved upon inmate addiction and behavioral issues,
with 74% of inmates reporting that they would consider recovery through exercise and 75%
reporting a decrease in depression, stress and anxiety (Nelson, et al). Along with these primary
effects, the study noticed that some secondary effects such as discipline and structured personal
habits may also arise from exercise routines, as “a healthy mind is complemented by a healthy
body and spirit” (Nelson, et al). Overall, the effects o f physical activity, if implemented on a
wide scale, may benefit a large portion of the American prison population, as “an estimated 45
percent of federal prisoners have mental health and behavioral problems” (“Mental Health”)
according to the Prison Policy Initiative, a criminal justice and public policy oriented non-profit
organization.
These positive statistics connecting physical activity to mental well-being are also
grounded in scientific studies. Aside from qualitative data taken directly from prisoner opinion,
psychologist Alicia Garcia-Falgueras in her 2015 article published by the British Journal of
Education, Society, and Behavioral Science concludes that improvement o f metabolic and

cognitive functions is a product of physical exercise. Exploring different scientific studies, she
explains the popular endorphins hypothesis in physical well-being, which is that practicing sports
facilitates endorphin release as “the hypothalamus produces endorphins in the form of peptides”
in the brain and reduces stress levels—benefits are also seen in terms o f emotional well-being, as
“sport affects psychological elements such as self-confidence and it also reduces the risk of
depression” (Garcia-Falgueras). This study can be taken into the context of prison exercise, as
the benefits brought by sports and physical activity preventing certain mood impairments and
increasing mental health are general. Instead of analyzing sports and its effects in different
environments, “physical activity does not necessarily imply the competitive component in teams
[.. . ] i t i s defined as any muscular effort or movements during personal systematic training”
(Garcia-Falgueras). Therefore, the moderate exercise routine that proved to benefit inmates
scientifically benefits them as well.
Clarifying the connection between mental health and sociability, a decrease in inmate
behavioral issues would help integrate former prisoners into society in the long term. According
to an article published by the Craig Haney University of California and found in the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, social withdrawal and isolation are identified as
detrimental effects of incarceration preventing prisoners from adjusting to society. While
confined to the prison environment, some inmates may “retreat deeply into themselves, trust
virtually no one, and adjust to prison stress by leading isolated lives of quiet desperation” (“The
Psychological Impact o f lncarceration: Implications for Post-Prison Adjustment”), which in
extreme cases may closely resemble aspects o f clinical depression. Therefore, physical activity,
especially when done with other individuals in the form of team sports, decreases alienation and

social invisibility before prisoners are released, thus increasing sociability as a method to help
integrate prisoners into society.

Counterarguments to Sports and Sociability

But even if improvements to mental health in and out of prison were to increase
sociability or reduce odds of recidivism, the relationship between physical health and
recidivation may be different. An article published by the peer-reviewed joumal SSM Population Health, a joumal that covers all aspects of the social sciences, found that better
physical health is related to a higher likelihood of recidivating. Through the use o f multinomial
regressions and correlation coefficients, the study found an association in new convictions with
individuals who made gains in physical health having approximately a third of an increased risk
of recidivating relative to those without changes in physical health (Wallace & Wang).
Therefore, this rebuts general physical activity and exercise, which focuses solely on the
individual and the betterment of one’s physique, but not team sport activities, which are shown
to have different physical and mental benefits that lead to increases in prisoner sociability.
But the correlation of an increase physical health and an increased likelihood of
recidivating does not necessarily mean causation. Clearly, the source identifies other factors that
may directly cause increase in recidivation when theoretically linking health and recidivism,
highlighting that incarceration can be a stressor in the long-term as “formerly incarcerated
individuals already experience difficulty finding employment, housing, and re-establishing or re­
building familial relationships” (Wallace & Wang). In this sense, exercise may simply be an
outlet for these structural problems that arise for former prisoners, creating the correlation

between physical health and recidivism, and therefore the study is unable to logically satisfy the
linkage between the two.
Another counterargument stems from the possible direct relationship between prison
physical activity and toxic or hegemonic masculinity. The 2001 book titled Prison Masculinities
written by experts including Don Sabo, an assistant professor o f Sociology at D ’Youville
College, found that sports activities play a large role in constructing aggressive masculine
identities and the development of a social hierarchy in prison— in this setting, “masculine
identity is earned, rehearsed, refined, and relived through each day’s activity” (Sabo, et al). In
this sense, providing prisoners with the opportunity to assert a physically dominant body,
intimidate other prisoners, and maintain a position in the prison hierarchy overall develops
toxically masculine traits within inmates, which therefore decreases sociability. Mark Norman’s
analysis agrees with the conclusions found by Don Sabo, by underlining the physical difficulties
of former prisoners who struggle to reintegrate into society. Caused by sports and physical
activity, prisoners developed “carceral habituses,” or changes to a person’s general constitution,
that include an extreme sensitivity about protecting personal space, a willingness to fight and a
resort to aggression, and even adjustments in posture (Norman). These long-term physical and
cultural impacts do not translate well outside of prison due of a decrease in an inmate’s
understanding and ability to socialize and communicate. In the short-term, furthermore, prisoners
may simply use sports matches to engage in levels of violence not otherwise tolerated by staff or
use sport spaces for illegal activities (Norman), consequently lessening the positive impacts of
sport and physical activity.
But due to the supervised settings in previous studies highlighting the positive
relationship between sports, physical activity, and sociability, the impact o f Sabo’s argument is

limited. Previous findings such as th e joumal article examining the effect of moderate physical
activity on rehabilitation created special accommodations for the experiment, as a “special
housing unit with a 126-bed capacity, named Foxtrot, was designated” (Nelson et al). With the
experiments being conducted in accordance with inmates’ consent and the placement of
controlled variables, this decreases the likelihood for inmates to engage in higher levels of
violence as Sabo or Norman both previously mention. Their conclusions, therefore, fail to rebut
the contention that fitness activity, as long as it is supervised, improves prisoners’ health status.
Furthermore, the scientific baseline provided by Garcia-Falgueras stating that physical exercise
directly increases mental health—which is linked to sociability— still remains even if these
counterarguments are true. To this end, sport and physical activity, through its benefits to
physical health and mental health— especially mental health—ultimately increases the sociability
of prisoners.

Works Cited

Battaglia, Claudia, et al. “Benefits of Selected Physical Exercise Programs in Detention: a
Randomized Controlled Study.” International Journal o f Environmental Research and
P ublic Health, MDPI, 31 Oct. 2013, www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/ articles/PMC3863865/.
Sabo, Don, et al. Prison Masculinities. Contemporary Sociology, 19 Jan. 2001.
Garcia-Falgueras, Alicia. “Psychological Benefits of Sports and Physical Activities.” British
Journal o f Education, Society & Behavioral Science, 22nd November 2015, College
Board, pp. 9-14.
Haybum, Tim. “Baseball Behind Bars: Prison Baseball at Eastern State Penitentiary in the Early
Twentieth Century.” Journal o f Sport History, vol. 34, no. 2, 2007, pp. 253­
270. JSTOR, www.jstor.org/ stable/43610019. Accessed 29 Mar. 2021.
ICPR. "Countries with The Largest Number o f Prisoners per 100,000 o f The National
Population, as of June 2020." Statista, Statista Inc., 16 Jun 2020,
https://www.statista.com/statistics/262962/countries-with-the-most-prisoners-per-100000-inhabitants/.
Kraus, Aaron. “The Importance o f Prison Recreation.” The Spectator, The Spectator, 22 Oct.
2020, spec.hamilton.edu/the-importance-of- prison- recreation- 15e39055 cb48.
“Mental Health.” Prison Policy Initiative, Prison Policy Initiative,
www.prisonpolicy.org/research/mental_health/. Accessed 18 Apr. 2021.
Nelson, Meredith, et al. “The Effects o f Moderate Physical Activity on Offenders in a
Rehabilitative Program.” Journal of Correctional Education, vol. 57, no. 4, 2006, pp.
276- 285. JSTOR, www.jstor.org/ stable/23282802. Accessed 26 Mar. 2021.

Norman, Mark. Sport and Physical Recreation in Canadian Federal Prisons: An Exploratory
Study o f Carceral Physical Culture. 2015. University o f Toronto, PhD thesis.
Norman, Mark. “Sport Behind Bars: Social Control, Resistance, and the Physical Culture of
Prisons.” Engaging Sports, The Society Pages, 5 July 2017, thesocietypages.org/
engagingsports/2017/07/05/ sport-behind-bars-social- control- resistance-and-thephysical-culture-of-prisons/.
“The Psychological Impact o f lncarceration: Implications for Post-Prison Adjustment.” ASPE,
23 Mar. 2017, aspe.hhs.gov/basic-report/psychological-impact-incarcerationimplications-post-prison-adjustment.
“Trends in Prison Population and Spending: 2010 - 2015.” Vera Institute o f Justice,
www.vera.org/publications/price-of-prisons-2015-state-spending-trends-population-andspending. Accessed 8 Apr. 2021.
Wallace, Danielle, and Xia Wang. “Does in-Prison Physical and Mental Health Impact
Recidivism?” SSM - Population Health, Elsevier, 20 Mar. 2020,
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/ articles/PMC7113431/.