WOMEN IN SPORTS

AP Seminar
Word Count: 1726
Women in Sports
Sports have always been part of civilization, no matter what period it was. It was
with the Romans and their handball, soccer, field hockey, or the Incas and their soccer,
kickball, and basketball. The women in Roman times like today did not have as many
opportunities to participate in sports as the men did. That, however, did not stop them.
The Romans were mainly interested in fighting, so the gladiator was very popular. A
women gladiator was called a gladiatrix. The gladiators would fight other people or
animals for the entertainment of the Roman elites. The gladiators were the lowest of the
low, even though they were viewed as mighty warriors. Most of them were prisoners of
war or people sentenced to death. The gladiators had to fight to survive.
Like women in sports, gladiators were viewed as lesser and not necessary. This leads
to the question, Can sports affect how a woman is seen by others in and outside of
sports? According to Travis Schaedler and Audrey Wagstaff, professors at Wilmington
College with PHDs, "All too often, sports fans, athletes, administrators, etc. discriminate
ag, against female athletes. Many sports fans are not even interested in watching
women's sports" (Schaedler). In contrast, sports fans like to watch women's sports like
volleyball, softball, and the WNBA. The majority of people prefer men's sports over
women's sports. This is because they believe that men's sports give more of a thrill and
rush. After all, they are naturally more athletic and better at the sport and can perform
higher than most women. Another contributing factor to women's sports not being
viewed as much as men's sports is because women's sports aren't being covered on

WOMEN IN SPORTS

sports channels. Sports channels mainly view men's sports because most people are
only interested in men's sports. According to Travis Schaedler and Audrey Wagstaff,
both professors at Wilmington College with PHDs, "A study examining ESPN's
SportsCenter and three Los Angeles networks discovered that only 1.4% of
SportsCenter's coverage and 1.6% of the local networks' coverage were of women's
sports, the lowest in at least 20 years" (Schaedler). Because of the small amount of
women's sports coverage, they don't have an equal chance to be as popular as men's
sports. If women's sports were played on sporting channels more often, people would
be more likely to watch them and take a liking to the events. Women's sports can be just
as exciting and fun as men's sports if the viewer has the right mindset and positively
looks at them.
But along with the more popularity comes more criticism and shame. If women's sports
are shown more often, men who are used to watching men's sports will now have the
chance to critique the women playing the sports and shame them. Whether it is body
shaming them or shaming them on how they aren't as skilled as their male counterparts.
This could lead to a significant rethinking of how women's sports are viewed and
possibly decrease viewers' and fans' total numbers.

It is essential that viewers need to promote and encourage and lift female players
when there are those out there hating on them. If everyone hates female athletes, this
will cause many of the female athletes to stop playing and stop doing what they love
because of other people. According to the Women's Sports Foundation, "Peer pressure
can be hard for girls at any age; when that pressure isn't offset with strong

WOMEN IN SPORTS

encouragement to participate in sports and healthy physical activity, the results may
lead girls to drop out altogether" (Women's Sports Foundation). This shows that no
matter the age of a female athlete, discrimination can lead to intense psychological
effects that can lead them to stop doing what they love, sports. The way to counteract
this discouragement is to encourage them and boost their confidence in their skills.
They may not be as skilled as their male counterparts, but they don't have to be the best
in the world to play a game. The main point of a sport/game is to have fun.
Some athletes are competitive, but the majority enjoy the sport and want to have a good
community that loves and supports what they love. There are other reasons to keep
female athletes in their sports other than just because they love playing the sport.
Sports teach women important qualities they need in life. As reported by the stimulus
material written by Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, "Sport can be one of the great drivers of
gender equality, by teaching women and girls the values of teamwork, self-reliance, and
resilience… when the pressure to conform to traditional "feminine" stereotypes leads
many girls to abandon sport entirely" (Ngcuka). Women in sports are vitally important
because of the mental benefits that help them get through life. Sports show women how
to be the best version of themselves, not only physically but mentally too. Sports aren't
the only way to learn these skills, but sports have been proven to teach these skills.
These skills are not something that comes by easily. It takes time and patience to learn
this. This is why in order to help female athletes learn these skills, we need to be
encouraging and not discriminate against them because discriminating against them
doesn't only affect their sports lives. Still, it also affects their personal lives, in their
homes, and with their family and friends.

WOMEN IN SPORTS

Sports have many effects on athletes' lives, including physical and mental health.
Sports can change both boy's and girl's lives. According to multiple authors with various
PHDs, "Regular exercise can have a profoundly positive impact on depression, anxiety,
and ADHD. It also relieves stress, improves memory, helps you sleep better, and boosts
your overall mood" (Robinson et al.). The benefits of sports outweigh the downsides to
sports. Sports can and have been proven to improve your mental and physical
wellbeing. The improved mood in sports leads to athletes being less likely to drop out of
their sport because of discrimination from viewers. According to a nationwide US study,
"Millions of US adolescents participate in school-based, and community sports
programs and, furthermore, athletic involvement is ostensibly associated with protective
factors that have been generally found to reduce suicide risk among young people"
(Sabo et al.). Because of sports' positive effects, the suicide rate amount young boys
and girls have dramatically decreased. This, however, is counteracted with the
discrimination from viewers, causing these young athletes to quit their sports and the
depression and suicide rates go back to where they were before. To defend against the
discrimination, coaches, families, and friends of athletes need to do nothing other than
encouraging and lifting the athletes and ensuring that the discriminating fan doesn't
know what they are talking about. According to the author of the stimulus material Alicia
Garcia-Falgueras, "So far, … studies found in scientific literature that have investigated
the relationship between physical exercise and the levels of depression, are
correlational rather than parametrical, indicating a possible preventive effect of
depression symptoms instead of a cure" (Falgueras). Depression is something that

WOMEN IN SPORTS

does not have a known cure. The only way to stop it is to prevent it. This can be done
through sports. Not only participating in the sports but encouraging the athletes and
boosting their self-esteem. Discrimination against athletes is the root cause of poor
mental health in ex-athletes.

Viewers do not just commit the discrimination of female athletes; some sports
channels and critiques also discriminate against female athletes. The statistic
mentioned earlier said a minimal amount of sports channels cover women's sports. This
shows how viewers are not only discriminating against female viewers, but it is the male
sports system in general. This is not saying that all male athletes themselves
discriminate against women, but some of the male athlete's programs do discriminate
against females. According to Mary Halton, an assistant Ideas Editor at TED and a
science journalist in the pacific northwest, "...studies on high-intensity interval training,
the ketogenic diet, and paleo intermittent fasting are all done on (often sedentary) men,
then generalized over to the entire fitness population" (Halton). The male sports
programs are discriminating against women but not in a direct way. They passively
discriminate against women by not including them in their studies even though female
athletes are a big part of sports today. This study excludes women and gives them a
disadvantage because they don't know the proper diet for a female athlete because no
studies were done to figure it out. The same author Mary Halton also said, "New
Zealand-based Sims is on a mission to get the sporting world to recognize that "women
aren't just small men" but have their own set of nutritional and physiological needs"
(Halton). This shows that even more than female athletes aren't getting the same

WOMEN IN SPORTS
attention and nurturing that their male counterparts are getting. Male athletic programs
don't always know they are discriminating against women. But not including them in
their programs or their studies discriminates against female athletes, and this has to
change for female sports to exist. If the athletic programs available for men were to
open up and include women athletic teams in their studies and training programs, this
would dramatically decrease the difference between male and female sports.

With these solutions, female sports would finally be recognized as equal to their
male counterparts. The best way to end discrimination against female athletes and
show viewers that female athletes can be famous as male athletes are to combine
them. They are not connecting the teams and making games both gender games. But
including the women in sporting channels and studies and the athletic programs used
for the male athletes. This will be one step to fixing a more significant problem:
discrimination against women outside of sports.

WOMEN IN SPORTS

Work Cited

Fife, Steven. “Athletics, Leisure, and Entertainment in Ancient Rome.” Ancient
History Encyclopedia, Ancient History Encyclopedia, 15 Mar. 2021,
www.ancient.eu/article/98/athletics-leisure-and-entertainment-in-ancient-ro
m/#:~:text=Ball%20Games%3A%20During%20their%20exercises,sphaeric
a%20(ball%2Dcourts).
“Sport and Entertainment - Ancient Incas 6J 2013.” Google Sites,
sites.google.com/a/newington.nsw.edu.au/ancientincas6j2013/sport-and-ent
ertainment-1.
Scheadler, Travis, and Audrey Wagstaff. “Exposure to Women's Sports: Changing
Attitudes Toward Female Athletes.” The Sport Journal, 25 May 2018,
thesportjournal.org/article/exposure-to-womens-sports-changing-attitudes-to
ward-female-athletes/.
“Do You Know the Factors Influencing Girls' Participation in Sports?” Women's
Sports Foundation, 11 Oct. 2019,
www.womenssportsfoundation.org/do-you-know-the-factors-influencing-girls
-participation-in-sports/.
Robinson, Lawrence, et al. “The Mental Health Benefits of Exercise.”
HelpGuide.org,
www.helpguide.org/articles/healthy-living/the-mental-health-benefits-of-exer
cise.htm#:~:text=Regular%20exercise%20can%20have%20a,and%20boost

WOMEN IN SPORTS

s%20your%20overall%20mood.
Sabo, Don, et al. “HIGH SCHOOL ATHLETIC PARTICIPATION AND
ADOLESCENT SUICIDE: A Nationwide US Study.” International Review for
the Sociology of Sport, U.S. National Library of Medicine, 2005,
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2563797/.
Mlambo-Ngcuka, Phumzile. “Empowering Women Through Sport.” Olympic
Review - Issue 110, pp. 40 - 49. International Olympic Committee, Mar.
2019, olympicreview.touchlines.com/110/1-1.
Garcia-Falgueras, Alicia. “ Psychological Benefits of Sports and Physical
Activities.” British Journal of Education, Society & Behavioural Science,
vol 11, no 4, Nov. 2015, pp. 1–7, doi:10.9734/BJESBS/2015/21865.
Halton, Mary, et al. “Sports Are Designed around Men - and That Needs to
Change.” Ideas.ted.com, 4 Feb. 2021,
ideas.ted.com/sports-are-designed-around-men-and-that-needs-to-change/.