ANALYZING THE SAFETY AND FEASIBILITY OF HUMAN GERMLINE EDITING
USING CRISPR-CAS9 SYSTEMS

Analyzing the Safety and Feasibility of Human
Germline Editing Using CRISPR-Cas9 Systems
Word Count: 1270
(not including title page and references)

Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org.

ANALYZING THE SAFETY AND FEASIBILITY OF HUMAN GERMLINE EDITING
USING CRISPR-CAS9 SYSTEMS
The focus of our group for this project is genetic engineering in human embryos, or human
germline editing. Our research question following this topic is “To what extent should CRISPRCas9 be limited when genetically editing the human germline?” CRISPR-Cas9, or clustered
regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats and associated protein 9, is a system modified
from a bacterial immune system that can be used to find and insert, delete, or edit any piece of
DNA. This technology was discovered/developed in 2015 and is much more efficient, easy to
use, and inexpensive than past technologies such as zinc finger nucleases (ZFNs) and
transcription activator-like effector nucleases (TALENs). Because CRISPR-Cas9 is such an
improvement over what already existed, it has opened many new possibilities that would have
been much more difficult before. One of these possibilities, among others, is human germline
editing.
Human germline editing is any process that changes the DNA of a germ (or reproductive)
cell to be passed down to the next and following generations. This does not include genetic edits
in somatic cells that would only affect some parts of an individual and would not be passed down
to the next generation. We chose this topic because it is relatively specific, compared to gene
editing in general, but still has a broad range of perspectives. Despite recent attempts to reach it,
there is no broad consensus about human germline editing, within both the scientific community
and the wider public. However, because CRISPR-Cas9 is so accessible, a consensus needs to be
met.
The debates surrounding human germline editing have many different facets including
ethical, social, economic, political, historical, and scientific. This paper will focus on the
scientific side, because if human germline editing is not possible scientifically, the rest of the
debates are pointless. As such, this paper will analyze the safety and feasibility of human
germline editing, the main scientific issues.
Currently, there are three main safety concerns regarding our current practices for
germline editing: mosaicism, off-target changes, and side effects of the new gene. Mosaicism is
when the cells in an embryo are not uniformly edited, with a mix of “fixed” and unchanged cells.
This usually occurs when CRISPR-Cas9 does not act quickly enough and the cells start to split
before the DNA has been edited. Off-target changes are edits in the DNA at places other than the
intended target. CRISPR-Cas9 is not perfect and makes mistakes when searching for the correct
set of base pairs. Side effects of the new gene can occur when we don’t know all of the functions

Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org.

ANALYZING THE SAFETY AND FEASIBILITY OF HUMAN GERMLINE EDITING
USING CRISPR-CAS9 SYSTEMS
of a gene. Many genes have multiple functions and it is nearly impossible to know what will
happen exactly when a gene is changed.
The first two, mosaicism and off-target changes, were evident in the three studies that
attempted to edit genes in embryos. The first two, done in China in 2015 and 2016, used
tripronuclear embryos (which are nonviable), to avoid the ethical debate surrounding the use of
viable embryos. Besides being nonviable, tripronuclear embryos are suitable stand-ins for regular
embryos. The results were only partially successful. Mosaicism was prevalent and off-target
mutations were present. (Kang et al., 2016; Liang et al., 2015) These results indicate that while
CRISPR-Cas9 is much better than previous technologies, the technology itself and the practices
for its use both need to be much improved in order for it to be safe for human germline editing.
The latest study, conducted in 2017, had better results because CRISPR-Cas9 was added at the
same time as the sperm, instead of after fertilization, resulting in less prevalent mosaicism. In
addition, no off-target changes were found. (Ma et al., 2017) This shows that the technology and
practices are improving and that eventually mosaicism and off-target changes can be brought
down to a minimum. These three studies were all published in peer-reviewed academic journals
and seemed to follow good experiment procedures. They are all controversial, but this is largely
due to the controversy that surrounds human germline editing and research with embryos in
general, not the studies in particular.
A speech given at the International Summit on Human Gene Editing in 2015, elaborates
on the third issue. Eric Lander, an expert in the human genome who even played an important
role in the Human Genome Project, spoke about the complexity of disease and its relationship
with human genetics. The genetic root behind a disease can be very difficult to find, requiring
massive amounts of data, and even when a gene is known to be connected, exactly how the
connection works is usually not known. Additionally, with polygenic diseases, most of the genes
only have a small impact in risk of contracting the disease. Mendelian diseases, diseases that are
caused by a single mutation, would be much easier to prevent, but even then many genes have
multiple purposes. A gene that makes someone more vulnerable to one disease might protect
them from another. (Lander, 2015) Obviously, there is a lot about genetics and disease that
remains unknown and while this knowledge gap remains, we won’t be able to tell exactly what
will happen when we change a gene.

Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org.

ANALYZING THE SAFETY AND FEASIBILITY OF HUMAN GERMLINE EDITING
USING CRISPR-CAS9 SYSTEMS
According to one group of scientists, this unpredictability means that human germline
editing is not worth it. They called for a voluntary moratorium against human germline editing
due to its lack of safety. They also argued that any therapy offered by human germline editing
could be achieved using other techniques, so it was not worth the risks. If anyone did move
forward with it and something went wrong, somatic gene therapy might be associated with
germline editing and be negatively affected by any negative public reaction. (Lanphier, Urnov,
Haecker, Werner, & Smolenski, 2015) This would definitely harm the authors of the article, as
all of them are involved with somatic gene therapy. Given their involvement in this field it
should be kept in mind that they would also stand to benefit from a ban of human germline
editing as it would most likely be competition to somatic gene therapy. So it stands to reason that
they would be biased against human germline editing. Nevertheless, their position is valid.
The organizing committee of the International Summit on Human Gene Editing took a
different position however. In their statement, they stated that basic and preclinical research is
needed and that studies using human embryos were acceptable, as long as the embryos did not
result in a pregnancy. Instead of warning off human germline editing entirely, they approved of
moving with forward with proper precautions. The key safety issues mentioned before would
need to be solved and the safety of the human germline editing would need to be demonstrated
before it would be available for clinical use (including both clinical research and therapy).
(Organizing Committee for the International Summit on Human Gene Editing, 2015) The
organizing committee was made up of experts in the field and was obviously more open minded
about human germline editing. They looked at the issue from multiple lenses and perspectives
throughout the summit and based the statement off of the cases made at the summit. The summit
was sponsored by the U.S. National Academy of Sciences, the U.S. National Academy of
Medicine, the Royal Society, and the Chinese Academy of Sciences, all authorities on science
and medicine.
Human germline editing using CRISPR-Cas9 is not yet safe enough to be feasible for
clinical use, which is why further research is required. With more research and improvement on
the technology and practices, the safety of the human germline editing could improve to be safe
enough for clinical use, if ethical, social, and other debates are resolved.

Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org.

ANALYZING THE SAFETY AND FEASIBILITY OF HUMAN GERMLINE EDITING
USING CRISPR-CAS9 SYSTEMS
References
Kang, X., He, W., Huang, Y., Yu, Q., Chen, Y., Gao, X., … Fan, Y. (2016) Introducing precise

genetic modifications into human 3PN embryos by CRISPR/Cas-mediated genome
editing. Journal of Assisted Reproduction and Genetics, 33(5), 581-588.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10815-016-0710-8
Lander, E. S. (2015) What we don’t know. In International Summit on Human Gene Editing: A
Global Discussion Commissioned Papers. Retrieved from
http://nationalacademies.org/cs/groups/pgasite/documents/webpage/pga_170455.pdf

Lanphier, E., Urnov, F., Haecker, S. E., Werner, M., Smolenski, J. (2015). Don’t edit the human
germ line. Nature, 519(7544), 410-411. http://doi.org/10.1038/519410a

Liang, P., Xu, Y., Zhang, X., Chenhui, D., Huang, R., Zhang, Z., … Huang, J.
(2015).CRISPR/Cas9-mediated gene editing in human tripronuclear zygotes. Protein &
Cell, 6(5), 363–372. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13238-015-0153-5
Ma, H., Marti-Gutierrez, N., Park, S., Wu, J., Lee, Y., Suzuki, K., … Mitalipov, S. (2017).
Correction of a pathogenic gene mutation in human embryos. Nature, 458, 413–419.
http://doi.org/10.1038/nature23305
Organizing Committee for the International Summit on Human Gene Editing. (2015, December
3). On Human Gene Editing: International Summit Statement. Retrieved from
http://www8.nationalacademies.org/onpinews/newsitem.aspx?RecordID=12032015a

Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org.