The Effects of a Vegetarian Diet on Modern Day Health Issues in the USA
With the amount of diversity in our country, the United States of America, there are
many different ways people eat. According to the Vegetarian Times, a 40 year old magazine
recently put online in 2017, based on a 2008 study “7.3 million people follow a
vegetarian-based diet” (Editors, pg. 1). A vegetarian diet is any diet or eating trend that excludes
eating meat at all yet all the while continuing to consume animal products such as egg or milk.
A diet where one does not consume meat or animal products is known as a vegan diet. It is well
known that diets affect your nutrition and in her paper “Impact of Dietary Pattern on Human
Life Quality and Life Expectancy: A Mini-Review” Ceren Gerzer states that during one's
lifetime nutrition has an effect on their health status. (Gerzer, pg 1). Some modern day health
issues are things such as an individual’s life expectancy, heart disease, and obesity. Each of
these health issues can be and are influenced by your diet, which could range from lifestyle
diets such as veganism and vegetarianism to food plan diets such as the Mediterranean and
DASH diets. More specifically, a vegetarian diet directly influences each modern day health
issue: life expectancy, heart disease, and obesity.
Life expectancy is the average amount of time that people from a specific area live from
birth till death. Vegetarian diets have a direct impact on life expectancy. Ceren Gerzer, who is
part of the Department of Nutrition and Dietetics at Eastern Mediterranean University, even
puts in her paper that a “vegetarian diet can produce 3.6 years increase in life expectancy”
(Gerzer, pg. 2). This increase in life expectancy is a direct result of a long term vegetarian diet,
which only happens when one has been following a vegetarian diet plan since at least early
adulthood. The Center for Disease Control (CDC) showed an increase in life expectancy for all

of America. According to the CDC, a government funded agency, the life expectancy in
America from 1970-2014 has risen for everyone regardless of race, sex, or diet (Arias et al, pg.
4). So this means that the increase of 3.6 years for someone following a vegetarian diet is on top
of the life expectancy increase already in place. One thing that can determine whether a
vegetarian diet will have an affect on life expectancy is diet quality, which is measured by a
diversified, balanced, and healthy diet. According to Ceren Berzer, “diet quality is one of the
main part[s] of life quality, thus related with longevity” (Berzer, pg 1). This means that if a
vegetarian diet has a higher diet quality, then it would help to increase life expectancy.
According to Mayo Clinic, a non profit academic medical center focused on integrated clinical
practice, education, and research, a vegetarian, when planning their diet, should “choose a
variety of healthy plant-based foods” (Mayo Clinic, pg 1). A vegetarian who follows this
suggestion of “a variety of… plant-based food” by the Mayo Clinic will have a result of a
vegetarian diet with an enhanced diet quality. As a result of this ‘enhanced diet quality’ a
vegetarian will experience an increase in life expectancy.
According to the CDC about “610,000 people die of heart disease in the United States
every year”, and they go on to say that this accounts for “1 in every 4 deaths” (CDC, pg 1). This
is one of the greater health issues in the United States of America. In a paper by Winston J
Craig and Ann Reed Mangals, in association with the American Dietetic Association, titled
“Position of the American Dietetic Association: vegetarian diets”, says that “vegetarians [are] at
lower risk of death from ischemic heart disease than non vegetarians” (Craig et al, pg. 7). It can
be inferred from this paper that a vegetarian diet has a positive effect on heart disease, which is
lessening the disease. In an analysis of studies titled “Mortality in Vegetarians and

Visit the College Board on the web: collegeboard.org.

Non-Vegetarians: A Collaborative Analysis of 8300 Deaths Among 76,000 Men and Women in
Five Prospective Studies”, one of the studies looked at the effects of being a vegetarian on heart
disease and it was found that “there was evidence of heterogeneity… for mortality” for people
with heart disease (Thorogood, pg. 4). This evidence of heterogeneity is that vegetarians die less
from heart disease than non vegetarians regardless of sex or how differently divided up the
participants were.
Obesity is a growing problem in America. The Centre for Science in the Public Interest
even states that “obesity rates have doubled in adults” and have even “tripled in children” (pg.
1). With this being stated in the paper “The relation between dietary change and rising US
obesity” by JK Binkley, who is part of the Department of Agricultural Economics at Purdue
University, it states that since “vegetarians tend to be lighter” the effect on obesity “should be
negative”(Binkley et al, pg 8). Binkley is saying that a vegetarian diet can lessen the extent
someone is obese. In the paper, “The relation between dietary change and rising US obesity”, a
chart shows that people who say they are vegetarian have a significantly lower BMI than any
other diet, lifestyle, or demographic in that chart (Binkley et al, pg 3). BMI or body mass index
is the relation between one’s weight and height which can be affected by things such as food
intake and exercise. Since a higher BMI is caused by a higher intake of food, a vegetarian diet
must cause followers to feel fuller while still consuming less food. Thus inferring that a
vegetarian diet is beneficial towards people looking to be less obese. In the study titled
“Prevalence of obesity is low in people who do not eat meat” done by T. Key and G. Davey, the
chart on page 1 shows that no matter age or gender when compared with meat eaters,
vegetarians always had a lower BMI and were less obese than meat eaters (Key, pg 1). This

Visit the College Board on the web: collegeboard.org.

shows that a vegetarian diet will cause people to become less obese with a lowered BMI. Based
on the study by T. Key and the paper by JK Binkley both show evidence that a vegetarian diet
can cause a follower of these diets to become less obese.
All in all, vegetarian diets have beneficial effects on modern day health issues. These
health issues being life expectancy, heart disease, and obesity. This can be seen in that a
vegetarian diet, in association with the growing life expectancy rates already taking place, has
an increase on life expectancy. It can also be seen since a vegetarian has a lower risk for being
diagnosed with heart disease and even a lower risk of death from heart disease. Lastly this can
be seen since a vegetarian diet causes one to be less obese with a lower BMI. Based on evidence
and research it is shown that a vegetarian diet has a beneficial effect on modern day health
issues in the United States of America.

Visit the College Board on the web: collegeboard.org.

Works Consulted
Arias, Elizabeth, et al. “United States Life Tables, 2014” Center for Disease Control (CDC). 14
August 2017. Paper
Barrett, Geraldine, et al. “Prevalence of Obesity is Low in People Who Do Not Eat Meat”
Department of Public Health Sciences, St George's Hospital Medical School. 28
September 1996 Paper
Binkley, JK, et al.“The Relation Between Dietary Change and Rising US Obesity” International
Journal of Obesity. 03 August 2000. Paper
Center for Disease Control (CDC). “Heart Disease Facts” 28 November 2017. Web
Center for Science in the Public Interest. “Why Good Nutrition is Important” Web
Dwyer, JT. Health
​
Aspects of Vegetarian Diets​ The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 01
September 1988. Book
Gerzer, Ceren. “Impact of Dietary Pattern on Human Life Quality and Life Expectancy: A
Mini-Review” Eastern Mediterranean University. May 03, 2018. Paper
Key, Timothy J, et al. “Mortality in Vegetarians and Nonvegetarians: A Collaborative Analysis
of 8300 Deaths Among 76,000 Men and Women in Five Prospective Studies”
Cambridge University Press. 01 March 1998. Paper
Lusk, Jayson L., et al. “Some Economic Benefits and Costs of Vegetarianism” Cambridge
University Press. 15 September 2016. Paper
Vegetarian Times. “Vegetarianism in America” 16 April 2008. Web
WJ, Craig, et al. “Position of the American Dietetic Association: Vegetarian Diets”
Journal of the American Dietetic Association. 01 Jul 2009. Paper

Visit the College Board on the web: collegeboard.org.