AP Seminar
31 January 18

How clothing resellers hurt the community socially
Clothing resellers don't realize them trying to make a quick buck can be putting a
negative impact on the clothing community socially. People will wait in the lines lasting hours
even sometimes days just to get the new releases on brands such as supreme just to have the soul
purpose to buy and resell it for so much more than it's worth. Reselling causes people to buy
stuff they actually wanna wear for a price so marked up, and since the item is so hyped at the
moment this gives a chance for people to sell faked as real and make a huge profit, and there's
just a huge trust issue on what is real and what is fake now in the community.
First off most resellers don't even care about or respect the clothes and the brand they are
buying. There main goal is to just resell the clothes at a obscure price. Complex new a company
that follows up on the most recent trends, hype clothing and hollywood news conducted a
youtube video ( Here's What Happened at Supreme's First Drop of the Spring/Summer 2016
Season) where they visited the spring/ summer Supreme drop and interviewed resellers and what
they think and what are there plans to do with what they purchased. Emily oberg asked quite a
few people and one response was “ Imma get five sets of everything to resell… i have five
people in line to buy for me”. This man has five people in line for him to buy supreme stuff to
where he can resell them and make a quick buck. That means there could've been five other

Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org.

people in line who actually wanted to buy the stuff and who cared about the item and the culture
of Supreme but there spots are taken by someone whose main goal is just to resell. In the same
video emily asked a man what is your favorite part about NAS a famous rapper who ended up
having a collab with supreme during this drp and his response is “can't tell you what he did in
life…. He made me a couple of dollars today”. He doesn't even know who the rapper is on his
shirt that he has bought and like he said he was just there to make that quick buck. So now
someone who actually wanted that shirt isn't gonna be able to get it for the retail price and will
now have to pay double maybe even triple the price then what it went for retail.
There are people out there who will try and sell you fakes of the pieces you're wanting to
buy and take advantage of you on your knowledge of them. There are many websites that will
sell fake clothing and shoes. Websites like ebay, Poshmark and others offer a huge variety of
fake clothing and sneakers and a lot on where you wouldn't even be able to tell the difference
without being an expert on clothing. They will buy fake clothes and will sell them to you for the
same price as if they were real and take advantage of your lack of knowledge. This is almost the
same as scam artist who take advantage of elderly people to and get there credit as said in Fraud
Against Seniors..These scammers will take advantage of these elderly's people for being old and
not knowing any better and will just steal all their info and money and can seriously ruin their
lives. The way that some clothing resellers try and make their money is basically the same as
those scammers. They don't care if you're young old or elderly they're just trying to make money.
This is where that trust cmes in again, you might end up buying a real piece of clothing but with
all the amount of fakes ut there people will probably end up thinking it's not real. The clothing
resellers break the trust within the clothing community.

Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org.

A man by the name Yeezy Busta is a social media public figure with over 713k followers
(@Yeezybusta) who knows everything it has to do with the shoes Yeezys being real or fake. He
exposes famous celebrities for wearing fake Yeezys and this has in the passed hurt celebrities
images over social media and sometimes in real life. The reason why this is important is because
most of the time the people who he has exposed has bought there Yeezy from resellers who
ended up selling them fake shoes claiming they're real and they will end up paying that full top
price for these fake shoes and these celebrities will take pictures wearing these shoes and post
them on their social media accounts and Yeezy Busta will end up exposing them on his
instagram account if they are fake. His main goal is not to damage the celebrities career but to try
and expose on what is fake and what is real within our clothing community whether it has to do
with celebrities buying fakes directly from fake online places or of them being scammed by
resellers who are selling fake product.
An example of a reseller hurting someone socially over the internet is when Yeezy busta
ended up exposing a famous Youtuber by the name of Tanner Fox. Yeezy busta on a youtube
video (THESE YOUTUBERS HAVE FAKE YEEZYS... (Ft. YEEZYBUSTA) *Jake Paul,
Ricegum, and More...*) ended up exposing him for wearing fake Turtle Dove Yeezys and
people were not quite about it. Fans ended up going social media and commenting on a picture
(Instagram Post by Yeezy Busta • Nov 7, 2016 at 10:32pm UTC)​ ​ of him wearing the fake
Yeezys and basically made fun of him and saying a lot of very unnecessary stuff just because of
wearing fake Yeezys. Yeezy Busta did state in the video (THESE YOUTUBERS HAVE FAKE
YEEZYS... (Ft. YEEZYBUSTA) *Jake Paul, Ricegum, and More...*)​ that
​
Tanner did reach out
to him and that he did buy his Shoes from a reseller for the price of a real yeezy and basically got

Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org.

scammed. This has not just happened to Tanner but a whole lot more of other celebrities who've
been hurt socially by resellers.
If clothing resellers would stop purchasing these limited supply products and let the
people who actually cared about the brands and what there buy get these clothes or shes a lot of
the problems would stop. They would be able to just directly by from the retailer where it's the
normal price and you know it's real and we would be able to start slowly bringing that trust back
into the clothing community. Once they stop trying to make that quick buck that's when we can
start rebuilding what should already be built within our community.

Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org.

Works Cited

Complexmagazine. “Here's What Happened at Supreme's First Drop of the Spring/Summer
2016 Season.” YouTube,
​
​ YouTube, 19 Feb. 2016,
www.youtube.com/watch?v=kS-AnD3bQtQ&t=16s

“Fraud Against Seniors.” FBI,
​
​ FBI, 15 June 2016,
www.fbi.gov/scams-and-safety/common-fraud-schemes/seniors.

“THESE YOUTUBERS HAVE FAKE YEEZYS... (Ft. YEEZYBUSTA) *Jake Paul,
Ricegum, and More...*.” ​YouTube,​ YouTube, 26 July 2017,
www.youtube.com/watch?v=UuAihUtdb3U.

“Instagram Post by Yeezy Busta • Nov 7, 2016 at 10:32pm UTC.” ​Instagram,​
www.instagram.com/p/BMhpu9Dj7t1/?hl=en.

“Yeezy Busta (@Yeezybusta) • Instagram Photos and Videos.” ​Instagram,​
www.instagram.com/yeezybusta/?hl=en.

Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org.