Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder
Post- Traumatic Stress Disorder, also known as PTSD, is a mental health problem
where people have suffered through something terrible in their life. Anyone of any age
can develop PTSD. Mainly focusing on what causes teens to become diagnosed with
PTSD, the history of PTSD, what other countries are doing to solve the problem, and why
does it affect teens so much. There are things people can do to help anyone that is
diagnosed with PTSD.
To begin with, what causes the teen develop PTSD? There are many causes of
PTSD. One is that the teen is being neglected. Study shows that sixty-five percent of
teens are being neglected. Also, teens are being abused in different ways. Another
eighteen percent are being physically abused, ten percent is being sexually abused, and
seven percent are being mentally abused. All this abuse can be triggered by something so
simple and can hurt them. Teen are still basically children and abuse isn’t the right thing
to do. The abuser may have been the one to experience it before, therefore he/she wants
someone to feel the pain they are feeling or have felt. Disasters can also cause people to
develop PTSD. These disasters could be earthquakes, hurricanes, or war that has gotten
out of hand. Teens and children who experienced the most horrific traumas are more
likely to be diagnosed with PTSD. Statistics show that females are more likely to have a
higher risk of PTSD then males. Statistics show that fifteen to forty-three of girls go
through at least one trauma throughout their life. Fourteen to forty-three of boys go
through at least one trauma. Three to fifteen percent of girls are most likely to be
diagnosed while one to six percent of boys develop PTSD.

Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org.

Then, what is the history of PTSD? History shows that PTSD was first diagnosed
as a medical issue in the year of 1980 by the American Psychiatric Association. The years
of 1968-1980, there wasn’t an official diagnosis for PTSD. Then after the 1980’s, it was
known to be the third Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. There are
also other sever traumas that caused PTSD back in the 1980’s. Like, the Nazi Holocaust,
the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, and torture. It is terrible to have to see
people go through these horrible disaster that never should’ve happened. There are many
different stages of PTSD. For example, DSM- 5 is a stage of the Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorder that specifically affects people who receive death
threats or has witnessed a family member being hurt. Since the 1980’s, PTSD has gotten
the attention that it needed. It was once an anxiety disorder, but now isn’t. It affects
veterans because of their past experiences in wars including World War II and World
War I. Also some recent wars in Afghanistan can trigger a memory.
Afterward, how do people in other countries deal with PTSD? In other countries
that include the US, the UK, Germany, and France, PTSD can be dealt with in different
ways or in the same ways. For example, in the US, there is a solution called the
Psychological First Aid/ Crisis Management. This is used in schools and they comfort
and support the people that have to go through PTSD. Meanwhile, in other countries like
the UK, Germany, and France have the highest prevalence in PTSD and their solution to
this is to try and solve the problem on their own by using methods such as selfenhancement, conservation, self-transcendence, and an openness to change. There is a
goal to have for each solutions using methods such as self-enhancement that has a goal of
developing power and conservation, here is a category that involves security. Meaning

Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org.

they try to keep themselves in order. In the openness to change has a small category of
self-direction. Meaning that they have a path for themselves. In self-transcendence, there
is also a small category on universalism. This can mean to interact with people or be
involved in things such as clubs at school, on campus activity, and off campus activities.
Countries such as Spain and Switzerland have the lowest prevalence, but of all countries,
Croatia is an outlier. Meaning that it is not like the other countries. These other countries
may have been in war a while back or has recently gone through wars. There are veterans
that suffer with this condition because of everything that they had witnessed from the
war. They develop a condition called Traumatic Brain Injury. TBI is when something has
happened and it affects that person in a negative way and also cause them to change.
When they hear something as small as a balloon popping, it triggers a horrible memory.
Also there are homeless veteran in this world. It is hard for them to get jobs because
anything they do can trigger memories. It is also known as a mental disorder, war trauma,
and a cross-cultural assessment. Studies show that the European countries haven’t been
involved in any type of wars for the last 72 years. Meaning that there shouldn’t be many
people experiencing PTSD. There is still a chance of this diagnosis in the future. Meaning
that there may be a war in the future which leads into people joining the army and an
even higher risk of being diagnosed with PTSD effects. There are many ways that people
are trying to deal with this diagnosis and its great knowing how caring some people can
be to one another.
Finally, why does this affect teens so much? Statistics shows that this affects much
more because they are still young, but are also slowly maturing into adulthood. Between
the ages of twelve to eighteen are affected a lot because they are much more vulnerable.

Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org.

All this adds on even more stress then they have due to school. There can also be athletes
in sports and that adds another thing to their stress. Teens can be going through things
with their personal lives and something can be going on throughout social media. In the
future, this can cause them to become aggressive and may have behavioral problems. It
causes teens to feel alone like no one can help them. It is horrible to feel useless and
worthless. Also they feel like they can’t trust anyone and trust is a really important.
Without trust, people can’t be friends and feel alone. Teen who are already diagnosed
with depression and anxiety have a higher tendency of also being diagnosed with PTSD.
There are many things that people are to doing to help. Not only are teens being
diagnosed, but so are children and adults. It is horrible to know that young kids are
having to go through something so terrible. They should be healthy kids having fun, but
the fact that they are being neglected and abused is wrong. Nobody should have to go
through abuse and no future children shouldn’t have to. There are treatments that must
involve a psychiatrist. It is important about interaction with other people. Knowing teens
are not so fond of opening up.
In conclusion, teens deal with PTSD roughly. It is horrible to know that people
have to go through with this for their entire life. The causes of becoming diagnosed is
terrible, but it is good to know that there are people out there helping. PTSD occurs all
around the world and not just in one area. This is a serious matter that can be handled and
is being handled. It is important that people know about this PTSD because anyone can
be diagnosed at any time. All anyone has to do is to check up on their children often and
make sure they are fine. Small talks can change make a difference and sometimes the
smallest things are the most helpful/important.

Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org.

Bibliography
http://bmcresnotes.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/1756-0500-7-407
http://www.ptsd.va.gov/public/family/ptsd-children-adolescents.asp
http://www.ptsd.va.gov/professional/PTSD-overview/ptsdoverview.asphttp://www.brainline.org/content/2011/01/posttraumatic-stress-disorder-ahistory-and-a-critique_pageall.html

word count: 1313

Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org.