What can we do about climate change?

Introduction:
Climate change is an issue that is gaining more and more attention as we start to see the changes
on our Earth. In the stimulus material “Looking for The Gulf Motel” Richard Blanco touches on the fact
that the land that used to be there is gone. He describes how he wishes nothing was lost from this urban
development and that the mangroves were still there and not in the golf course. Not only are memories
lost, but even lives can be lost as a result of bigger and much more spread out cities. This is just one cause
of climate change that plays a big role in the extinction of many species. According to Newscientist, “IF
WE don’t stop climate change, half the animals and plants in the world’s wildlife havens will be gone by
2100. That’s according to a study gauging what will happen to 80,000 species in 35 of the most wildliferich areas, including the Amazon rainforest and the Galapagos Islands." (Coghlan). Limiting global
temperature rise to about 2 degrees Celsius would protect wildlife and limit species extinction of plants,
mammals, birds, reptiles and amphibians.
The effects are dangerous now and will only increase in their magnitude if we do nothing to stop
the warming of our planet. “Climatic changes already are estimated to cause over 150,000 deaths
annually,” (Climate Change) which is equivalent to the population of Tallahassee, the capital city of
Florida. Besides causing deaths, some effects include: shifts in precipitation, changing risk of certain
types of severe weather events and changes to other features of the climate system. “In fact, an additional
half a degree of warming from 1.5° C to 2 °C may cause 10 million more people to be at risk from sea
level rise, several hundred million more people to be susceptible to poverty, and a 50-percent increase in
the population exposed to water stress. It may double the population exposed to severe heat and cause an
additional annual loss of 1.5 million tonnes of global fisheries catch.” (Ocko). Clearly, this is affecting the
whole earth so it is a concern for all of us. If allowing another half a degree of warming will make several
hundred million more people, which is about the size of the United States, susceptible to poverty then we
have to stop overlooking this issue and work to prevent increased climate change.

Environmental Perspective:

Visit the College Board on the web: collegeboard.org.

Unfortunately, since this issue is still prevalent, we are seeing the effects. “Wildfires are
increasing and wildfire season is getting longer in the Western U.S. as temperatures rise. Higher spring
and summer temperatures and earlier spring snow-melt result in forests that are hotter and drier for longer
periods of time, priming conditions for wildfires to ignite and spread.” (Global Warming Impacts) As a
result of increased temperatures our environment is being directly impacted. These effects on forests,
which cause wildfires, feed into a feedback loop. “Wildfires emit carbon dioxide and other greenhouse
gases that will continue to warm the planet well into the future. They damage forests that would otherwise
remove CO2 from the air. And they inject soot and other aerosols into the atmosphere, with complex
effects on warming and cooling.” (Berwyn) The only way to slow this down is to find out the major
causes of this vicious cycle and work to reverse the effects of climate change across the planet.

Economic Perspective:
Americans are starting to see the effects of climate change and the public opinion is starting to
change from the trends in the past. “Some 73 percent of Americans polled late last year said that global
warming was happening, the report found, a jump of 10 percentage points from 2015 and three points
since last March.” (Schwartz) While many agree that we should do something to counter climate change,
we are limited in our immediate actions because the US oil and gas industries provide many jobs. “The
US oil and gas industry’s total employment impact to the national economy in 2015, combining
operational and capital investment impacts, amounted to 10.3 million full-time and part-time jobs and
accounted for 5.6% of total US employment, according to a study commissioned by the American
Petroleum Institute and conducted by PwC LLP.” (Editors) To counter the decrease in jobs if the use of oil
was decreased, we could increase employment for renewable energy companies. “…climate solutions like
renewable energy are fueling our economy and creating good, well-paying jobs. In 2016, renewable
energy employed nearly 10 million people around the globe.” (Wait) Supporting companies that are
striving to develop new renewable-energy sources will lead to more jobs and an increased economy
surrounding this business. According to its website, Chevron “believes that encouraging practical, costeffective actions to address climate change risks while promoting economic growth is the right thing to
do.” (Chevron Policy) This is why the company is exploring renewable-energy sources such as solar,
wind, geothermal, biofuels and renewable diesel to meet energy demand and use energy efficiently.

Visit the College Board on the web: collegeboard.org.

Climate change is a global issue that will never be fully controlled unless the whole world works
together to put a stop to this. This should be tackled with multiple steps and actions as there is not a
simple solution to reduce climate change. First, we could significantly limit the amount of trees that we
are cutting down. “Every year, 33 million acres of forests are cut down. Timber harvesting in the tropics
alone contributes 1.5 billion metric tons of carbon to the atmosphere. That represents 20 percent of
human-made greenhouse gas emissions and a source that could be avoided relatively easily.” (Biello)
Ending tropical deforestation would be an effective first step against climate change. Unfortunately, this
process to stop deforestation is not plausible. According to Earth Day Network, the world’s largest
recruiter to the environmental movement who works with partners in 192 countries, “The livelihoods of
1.6 billion people depend on forests. Forests provide US$ 75–100 billion per year in goods and
services.” (Deforestation) This is also hard to stop because there are national and sub-national
governments as well as local communities and private companies that would have to be monitored and
controlled.
Although it would not be effective, we could place a limit of one or two children per couple to
reduce the number of humans that the earth has to sustain. “There are at least 6.6 billion people living
today, a number that is predicted by the United Nations to grow to at least nine billion by mid-century.
The U.N. Environmental Program estimates that it requires 54 acres to sustain an average human being
today—food, clothing and other resources extracted from the planet. Continuing such population growth
seems unsustainable.” (Biello) If a limit were to be placed, less resources would be demanded to provide
for the needs of that human. As a result, less resources like oil, food, wood and land would be used to
support them. Unfortunately, this limit would have negative effects over time as a result of the aging
workforce. The number of those who are the most capable of work (ages 15-59) will decrease decades
from now. After this, there may not be enough capable people to take care of this who can not work.

Scientists' Perspective:
In general, scientists agree that humans are the main cause of climate change whether it is
through electricity and heat production, industry emissions, agriculture and forestry emissions,
transportation or emissions from buildings. According to Margaret Thatcher in her Speech to the United
Nations General Assembly as referenced in the stimulus material, “Put in its bluntest form: the main

Visit the College Board on the web: collegeboard.org.

threat to our environment is more and more people, and their activities: The land they cultivate ever more
intensively; The forests they cut down and burn; The mountain sides they lay bare; The fossil fuels they
burn; The rivers and the seas they pollute.” (Thatcher, Margaret) This source in the stimulus material
helps open our eyes to the effects of something that most people seem to overlook. Many efforts to halt
climate change is focused on stopping actions that we already do like burning fossil fuels. Margaret
Thatcher brings up the fact that if we continue to rapidly increase the population then it will be even
harder to stop these harmful actions. As the population grows we are cutting down more trees which
sacrifices their long-term benefits for our short-term gain. These are practices that, in the end, will result
in an irreversible effect on environments around the globe.
Carbon dioxide is a greenhouse gas that absorbs heat in the atmosphere. Concentrations of this
gas are rising as more fossil fuels are burned because fossil fuels contain carbon that is being released into
the atmosphere after plants pulled it out of the atmosphere. According to World Nuclear Association
“Fossil fuel power plants burn carbon fuels such coal, oil or gas to generate steam that drives large
turbines that produce electricity. These plants can generate electricity reliably over long periods of time.
However, by burning carbon fuels they produce large amounts carbon dioxide, which causes climate
change. They can also produce other pollutants, such as sulfurous oxides, which cause acid
rain.” (Electricity Generation) These power plants also require large amounts of coal, oil or gas to
function. On the contrary, nuclear power plants do not produce greenhouse gases and use less fuel to
provide consistent and reliable supplies of energy. While they are expensive to build, they are cheap to
run. Building more of these to keep up with our demands for energy would be a good step towards a
healthier environment. The United States’ generates 63.5% of its power from fossil fuels and 19.3% from
nuclear power plants. (U.S. Energy) In just a few decades these numbers could switch which would cut
out a major section of our yearly carbon dioxide output. “In 2014, the top carbon dioxide (CO2) emitters
were China, the United States, the European Union, India, the Russian Federation, and Japan. These data
include CO2 emissions from fossil fuel combustion, as well as cement manufacturing and gas flaring.
Together, these sources represent a large proportion of total global CO2 emissions.” (global Greenhouse)
These countries have an even greater responsibility to change their habits. With globe-wide participation
reversing climate change would be an easier task.

Visit the College Board on the web: collegeboard.org.

Conclusion:
In the end, the goal of working to reduce the output of greenhouse gases is to protect global plant
and animal habitats. Carbon dioxide is the main greenhouse gas that leads to climate change. The reason
we need to do this is that weather patterns such as rainfall, tropical storms, heat waves and droughts will
put others at risk of increased weather events. We should convert from fossil fuel-burning power plants to
nuclear power plants to reduce the carbon dioxide that is being released through the current power plants.
A limitation of this is that both types of plants provide a total of about a million jobs. Deforestation
should also be reduced to a minimum because it releases tons of carbon into the atmosphere and billions
of people depend on these forests. One solution that would not work is reducing the amount of children a
couple can have to one or two to decrease the expected influx of humans the earth will have to sustain
over time. This would lead to an aging population in which there may not be enough capable people to
work and support the rest of the population who can’t work. In general, if we continue to increase the
greenhouse effect then it will be harder to change the path that we are headed on. We should put better
practices in effect to stop increasing the effects of climate change. It is the responsibility of every country
to address this issue and contribute to its solution as it will affect us all in the end as well as the upcoming
generations with magnified effects.
Word count: 1,997

Visit the College Board on the web: collegeboard.org.

Bibliography:
1.

Bairlein, Franz. Ecological Responses to Recent Climate Change. Mar. 2002, http://
eebweb.arizona.edu/courses/ecol206/walther%20et%20al%20nature%202002.pdf.

2.

Berwyn, Bob. “How Wildfires Can Affect Climate Change (and Vice Versa).” InsideClimate News,
21 Feb. 2019, insideclimatenews.org/news/23082018/extreme-wildfires-climate-change-globalwarming-air-pollution-fire-management-black-carbon-co2.

3.

Biello, David. “10 Solutions for Climate Change.” Scientific American, 26 Nov. 2007,
www.scientificamerican.com/article/10-solutions-for-climate-change/.

4.

Chevron Policy. “Climate Change Initiatives.” Chevron.com, 7 Feb. 2019, www.chevron.com/
corporate-responsibility/climate-change.

5.

“Climate Change.” World Health Organization, World Health Organization, 7 Dec. 2010,
www.who.int/heli/risks/climate/climatechange/en/.

6.

Coghlan, Andy. “We Could Lose 40,000 Species by 2100 Due to Climate Change.” New Scientist, 14
Mar. 2018, www.newscientist.com/article/2163638-we-could-lose-40000-species-by-2100-due-toclimate-change/.

7.

“Deforestation and Climate Change.” Earth Day Network, www.earthday.org/campaigns/
reforestation/deforestation-climate-change/.

8.

Editors, OGJ. “Study: US Oil, Gas Industry Supported 10.3 Million Jobs in 2015.” Oil & Gas
Journal, 1 Aug. 2017, www.ogj.com/articles/2017/08/study-us-oil-gas-industry-supported-10-3million-jobs-in-2015.html.

9.

“Electricity Generation - What Are the Options?” Electricity Generation - What Are the Options? World Nuclear Association, www.world-nuclear.org/nuclear-basics/electricity-generation-what-arethe-options.aspx.

10. “Global Greenhouse Gas Emissions Data.” EPA, Environmental Protection Agency, 13 Apr. 2017,
www.epa.gov/ghgemissions/global-greenhouse-gas-emissions-data.
11. “Global Warming Impacts.” Union of Concerned Scientists, www.ucsusa.org/our-work/globalwarming/science-and-impacts/global-warming-impacts.
12. Ocko, Ilissa. “How Can Half a Degree of Warming Matter so Much?” Environmental Defense Fund,
18 Oct. 2018, www.edf.org/blog/2018/10/18/how-can-half-degree-warming-matter-so-much.
Visit the College Board on the web: collegeboard.org.

13. Schwartz, John. “Global Warming Concerns Rise Among Americans in New Poll.” The New York
Times, The New York Times, 22 Jan. 2019, www.nytimes.com/2019/01/22/climate/americans-globalwarming-poll.html.
14. Thatcher, Margaret. “Speech to United Nations General Assembly (Global Environment).” Margaret
Thatcher Foundation. www.margaretthatcher.org/document/107817.
15. “U.S. Energy Information Administration - EIA - Independent Statistics and Analysis.” What Is U.S.
Electricity Generation by Energy Source? - FAQ - U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA), 1
Mar. 2019, www.eia.gov/tools/faqs/faq.php?id=427&t=3.
16. “Wait, Why Is Climate Change a Bad Thing?” Climate Reality, 9 Mar. 2018,
www.climaterealityproject.org/blog/wait-why-climate-change-bad-thing.

Visit the College Board on the web: collegeboard.org.