Utilizing Data Science to Establish Sustainable Agricultural Production System in China
AP Seminar
5 April 2019
Word Count: 2087

Visit the College Board on the web: collegeboard.org.

The 21st century can as well be described as the Asian century (Mahbubani, 2008), with
China emerging as a global economic and political powerhouse that is contested only by the
United States (Wolf, 2018). Accompanying its growth is the expansion of its agriculture
industry, which employs more than 300 million farmers and tops the worldwide farm output
ranking (National Bureau of Statistics of China, 2008). Food security has always been one of the
top priorities of China due to its rapid population growth. The Chinese population grew from 600
million to over 1.3 billion in the past 50 years (National Bureau of Statistics of China, 2013),
which exerted “steady pressure on China to keep expanding its agricultural production” (Yu &
Wu, 2018). To meet the increasing demand for food, the Chinese agricultural sector adopted the
ideology of “pollute first, and then clean up” (Liu, 2010). As a result, the agricultural industry of
China became robust, feeding 22% of the world population (Liu, Zhang & Herbert, 2010).
However, this simultaneously engendered “serious environmental pollution” (Yu & Wu, 2018),
partly due to heavy reliance on chemical fertilizers (Norse & Ju, 2015). In fact, in 2013, the
Chinese agricultural sector used 59.11 million tons of fertilizers–35.5% of the world’s total
usage (Zhang, Dou & et al, 2013). The number will only increase if the Chinese government fails
to introduce effective means of sustainable, pollution-free production, which would degrade the
available arable soil, eventually hurting the Chinese agricultural industry and cutting the global
food supply to a significant extent. Therefore, it is crucial that the Chinese government invest in
altering its farming practices and achieve sustainable production in an effective manner. This
paper will examine which method the Chinese government should apply in order to facilitate
sustainable agriculture.

Visit the College Board on the web: collegeboard.org.

Fortunately, the need for sustainable agriculture has gained much attention since the late
20th century, and various researchers have put forward technology as a solution to such an
urgent trend of excessive use of chemical fertilizers. This is unsurprising given that technology
has increasingly been a key tool to facilitate scientific understanding of complex problems
ranging from global climate change1 (Thatcher, 1989) to urban transformation2 (Montgomery,
2008), which helps people to better react to them. In their article published in Scientific
​
American​, Plucknett and Winkelmann, two leading researchers in agricultural science, suggest
the use of biotechnology to modify the crops so that the crops would become more “efficient in
converting nutrients [from soil] into food and fiber products” (Plucknett & Winkelmann, 1995).
This could minimize the need for chemical fertilizers since the crops would self-sustain
sufficient amount of nutrients for their growth without the artificial input. In essence, biological
modification facilitates the growth of the crops just like chemical fertilizers do, but without
causing any environmental harms to the soil.
China has acknowledged such an advantage and has spent billions of yuan–equivalent of
hundreds of millions of the U.S. dollars–for its own biotechnological development in the early
21st century. It witnessed a rapid progress, as the Chinese government “approved two
pest-resistant varieties of rice and a biotech corn for commercialization” (Patton, 2014) in 2009.
Moreover, in September 2014, the Chinese government launched a media campaign to alter the
negative public perception about genetically modified organisms (GMO) by initiating public

In
​ her speech to the United Nations, Thatcher asserted that people should employ scientific research
with advanced technology to get the clearer picture of global warming and to come up with precise
solutions (Thatcher, 1989).

In
​ his article published in Science,
​
​ Montgomery explains how advanced use of data can help
demographic researchers to forecast the trend of urban transformation, thereby addressing the
urbanization issue more accurately (Montgomery, 2008).

Visit the College Board on the web: collegeboard.org.

education on GMO “via TV, newspapers and the Internet” (Patton, 2014). Recently, such a
sustainability-oriented effort reached beyond the domestic scope when the Chinese Academy of
Agricultural Sciences, a renowned science educational institution in China, hosted the
Australia-China Sustainable Agricultural Technology Forum in partnership with an equally
renowned Australian academic institution called University of Tasmania (Tasmanian Institute of
Agriculture, 2018). The forum encouraged an in-depth discussion on various topics including
GMO, enabling potential partnerships and investments on the relevant technology.
While the heavy emphasis on GMO development certainly contributes to facilitating
sustainable agriculture, it is crucial to examine whether or not China is opting for the best
method when it directs its sustainability effort to the development of biotechnology (Ellis, 2018).
The genetic modification of crops enables the crops to absorb nutrients in an efficient manner.
However, the quality of harvest does not solely rely on the crops’ ability to absorb nutrients, for
it is also affected by soil condition, weather, type of crops and the farmers’ efficient use of
resources (Stern, 2015; Dai, Welham & et al, 2016). Therefore, the improvement on the crops’
ability to absorb nutrients would not necessarily lead to the optimal outcome. It is worthy to look
into another type of technology that would account for a variety of the aforementioned factors
and help the farmers to manage their farming practices in the most efficient manner, thereby
strengthening the sustainable agriculture of China.
Luckily, such a technology exists thanks to the Fourth Industrial Revolution3 that entailed
the rapid development of an unprecedented field of computing technology: Data science. Data
science utilizes computer science and statistics to obtain key information and insights from a

A technological revolution facilitated by advanced computing and information technology that “will
fundamentally alter the way we live, work, and relate to one another” (Schwab, 2016).

Visit the College Board on the web: collegeboard.org.

mass amount of data (Dhar, 2013). A key information technology, it helps people to analyze the
available data of any kind and predict the relevant trend. Such a predictive capacity of data
science is utilized to optimize outcomes in various fields ranging from business to sports. For
instance, the e-commerce company Amazon collects a variety of data about its users such as the
reviews they leave, the amount of time they spend browsing certain page, and what users with
similar shopping habit purchase (Marr, 2018; Blakhi, 2019), which are then used to “predict
what [they] want to buy” and to “streamline the process of persuading [them] to buy it” (Marr,
2018). This enables Amazon to recommend suitable products to its customers and increase the
total sales4. Similarly, data science is used to predict the performance of potential athletes to
enable the “efficient acquisition of player talent” (Schuckers, 2016). A set of data including
potential athletes’ heights and weights, pre-draft performance, and rankings can be used to
estimate their future performance, which helps the scout managers of professional teams to make
right decisions.
Business and sports are by no means the only fields where the predictive capacity of data
science is employed, as it is also used to tackle sustainability-related problems.
Sustainability-related problems are the issues that warrant people to sustain a certain system by
making most of limited resources. Such a restrictive nature of the issue makes data science a
very useful tool as it generates reliable predictions about certain systems or phenomena, which
allows people to allocate the available resources in the most efficient manner and prepare for the
future. A relevant example comes from an article called “The Urban Transformation of the
Developing World” published in ​Science​. The article​ ​puts forward the issue of urbanization that

In
​ 2017, Amazon generated $178 billion in annual revenue–the highest value ever–and in September
2018, its market value reached $1 trillion (Streitfeld, 2018).

Visit the College Board on the web: collegeboard.org.

influences the problems of “urban poverty [and] the urban implications of global climate
change” (Montgomery, 2008), the two of which are officially set by the United Nations as
components of “the 17 Sustainable Development Goals” (United Nations, 2015). The article
suggests that the demographic community is dedicating its efforts to forecasting the city growth.
During the process, data is heavily used, with the United Nations Population Division leading the
effort by relying on the algorithmic city forecasting model (Montgomery, 2008). There are some
inaccuracies to the system, but the researchers are endeavoring to minimize them and to bolster
the current data science system.
The ability to forecast the trend of urban transformation is highly valued because it helps
the municipal governments to effectively monitor their population and build mechanisms to react
to the aforementioned sustainability-related issues that normally emerge from urban settings
(Montgomery, 2008). Indeed, with reliable data for population prediction, the politicians will be
able to decide how to distribute resources and where to build new infrastructure (Simpson,
2016), making the cities more sustainable and less susceptible to issues such as urban poverty
and climate change.
This is analogous to the case of agriculture in China given that the accurate forecast of
the quality of harvest can facilitate the selection of optimal farming practices. When farmers are
able to predict the results of certain farming practices, they will be able to compare a variety of
practices and choose the best one that would optimize their yield. This could lead to successful
harvests without the support of chemical fertilizers (University of California, Davis, Agricultural
Sustainability Institute, 2019), which will contribute in establishing a sustainable agricultural
production system in the nation.

Visit the College Board on the web: collegeboard.org.

DATA SCIENCE FOR SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE IN CHINA

Given that the positive impact of the forecasting is noted, it is crucial to discuss a certain
type of data science that would suit the particular need of the agricultural industry. A research
paper called “Machine Learning in Agriculture: A Review”5 expounds how data science can be
used to benefit the agricultural production system by facilitating “crop management [that
includes] yield prediction and soil management” (Liakos, Busato & et al, 2018). This paper
suggests the application of Machine Learning, which is a branch of data science that “gives
machines the ability to learn without being strictly programmed” (Liakos, Busato & et al, 2018).
In essence, the computer can learn to interpret complicated data and provide with accurate
predictions based on the input of past data.
Yield prediction is crucial in a sense that it enables the farmers to grow crops in the most
efficient manner. Machine Learning allows this process thanks to the high-performance
computing technology. For instance, when a group of researchers at National University of
Columbia attempted to predict the yield of coffee fruits, they designed a program that would take
the type and weight of a crop, the region of its harvest, and the water input into account and
automatically predict the quantity and quality of coffee fruits depending on the regions (Ramos,
Prieto & et al, 2017). Another group of researchers came up with the method to use satellite
images to observe the arable land, which would be input to the computer along with the
characteristics of certain crops. The data about soil and crops would then be synthesized to
predict the yield (Pantazi, Moshou & et al, 2016). This allows the farmers to simulate various
methods of farming on computer and choose the one that is likely to produce the best yield.

​Published in 2018 in a STEM-focused journal called Sensors
​
.​

Visit the College Board on the web: collegeboard.org.

Soil management constitutes an equally important part of sustainable agriculture since the
yield heavily depends on the quality of soil. It is crucial for the farmers to manage their soil
effectively by watering it properly. Data science plays a crucial role once again as it could
estimate “soil drying, condition, temperature, and moisture content” (Pantazi, Moshou & et al,
2016). For instance, in the American city of Urbana, the evaluation of the soil drying was tested.
The computer predicted the soil drying with the input of “evapotranspiration and precipitation
data” (Coopersmith, Minsker & et al, 2014) and aided the soil management process by informing
the farmers about when and how much water to put.
When applied to the Chinese agricultural industry, data science can transform the
production method from the “pollute first, and then clean up” (Liu, 2010) approach to a more
sustainable approach. The farmers will no longer have to rely on the chemical fertilizer as they
will be able to adopt efficient farming practices that would help them to achieve the highest
possible yield in a given environment. Currently, data science is being overshadowed by
biotechnology as the Chinese government is giving special attention to the biotechnology
industry, predicting that the biotechnology sector would exceed 4% of GDP by 2020 (Ellis,
2018), which is a significant number given that only a single technology is in charge of the share.
However, in order to truly establish the system of sustainable agriculture and secure food, it is
warranted that the government give equal attention to data science.
An objection may be raised due to potential inaccuracies of data science, as was the case
for the urban population prediction; the inability to draw the accurate boundary around Beijing
had caused a considerable inaccuracy in population prediction (Montgomery, 2008). Since the
operation of data science heavily relies on the input of past data, its prediction would not be

Visit the College Board on the web: collegeboard.org.

accurate if inaccurate data are input in the first place. However, such a shortcoming can be
covered in the agricultural sector as most of the data are quantifiable. The quantitative nature of
the data such as weight of crop, maturation percentage of crop, and precipitation rate would
minimize any subjectivity or inaccuracy. Thus, while the Chinese government should put extra
care in guaranteeing the accuracy of the initial data, the possibility of inaccuracy should not
hinder the governmental investment for agricultural data science.
While data science covers parts of farming that cannot be accounted by biotechnology, it
does not undermine the effectiveness of biotechnology. Data science provides the farmers with
yield prediction and the soil quality, which helps them to adjust their farming practices
accordingly. Yet, biotechnology modifies the crop itself and makes it take the most possible
nutrients from the available resources. In essence, data science and biotechnology lead to the
optimal result when they complement each other since the farmers would then be able to harvest
biologically-advanced crops with the efficient farming practices. Therefore, the Chinese
government should invest equally in biotechnology and data science in order to develop the
means for sustainable agriculture, ensuring the food security not just for China but for the world
as well.

Visit the College Board on the web: collegeboard.org.

References
Blakhi, S. (2019, January 18). How Companies Are Using Big Data to Boost Sales, and How
You Can Do the Same. Entrepreneur
​
​. Retrieved from https://www.entrepreneur.com/
​
article/325923

Coopersmith, E., Minsker, B., Wenzel, C., & Gilmore, B. (2014, June). Machine Learning
Assessments of Soil Drying for Agricultural Planning. ScienceDirect
​
​, 104, 93-104.
Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2014.04.004
Dai, J., Welham, C., Cao, L., & Cao, F. (2016). Sustainable Production In Subtropical Hybrid
Poplar Plantations. Journal
​
of Tropical Forest Science,​ 28
​ ​(2), 190-204. Retrieved from
http://www.jstor.org/stable/43799222
Dhar, V. (2013, December). Data Science and Prediction. ​Communications of the ACM​, 56(12),
64-73. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1145/2500499
Ellis, S. (2018, January 17). Biotech Booms in China. Nature.
​
​ Retrieved from
https://www.nature
.com/articles/d41586-018-00542-3
Liakos, K., Busato, P., Moshou, D., Pearson, S., & Bochtis, D. (2018, August 14). Machine
Learning in Agriculture: A Review. ​National Center for Biotechnology Information​.
Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.3390/s18082674
​
Liu, J. (2010, April 2). China’s Road to Sustainability. ​Science​, 50. Retrieved from:
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1186234
​
Liu, X., Zhang, X., & Herbert, S.J. (2010, May 27). Feeding
​
China’s Growing Needs For Grain.
Nature​, 420. Retrieved from: https://doi.org/10.1038/465420a

Visit the College Board on the web: collegeboard.org.

DATA SCIENCE FOR SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE IN CHINA

Mahbubani, K. (2008). The New Asian Hemisphere: The Irresistible Shift of Global Power to the
East. New York, United States: Public Affairs.
Marr, B. (2018). How Amazon Uses Big Data in Practice. ​Bernard Marr & Co.​ Retrieved from
https://www.bernardmarr.com/default.asp?contentID=712
Montgomery, M. (2008, February 8). The Urban Transformation of the Developing World.
Science​, 319, 761-764. Retrieved from http://science.sciencemag.org/content/
319/5864/761
National Bureau of Statistics of China. (2008, February 21). Communiqué on Major Data of the
Second National Agricultural Census of China (No.1). Retrieved from
https://web.archive.org/web/20131213092519/http://www.stats.gov.cn/was40/reld
etail. jsp?docid=402464541
National Bureau of Statistics of China. (2013, December 27). Population Statistics.
Norse, D., & Ju, X. (2015, November 1). Environmental Costs of China’s Food Security.
ScienceDirect​, 209, 5-14. Retrieved from https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0167880915000699
Pantazi, X., Moshou, D., Alexandridis, T., Whetton, R., & Mouazen, A. (2016, February). Wheat
Yield Prediction Using Machine Learning and Advanced Sensing Techniques. Science
Direct, 121, 57-65. Retrieved from https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0168169915003671
Patton, D. (2014, September 30). China Launches Media Campaign to Back Genetically
Modified Crops. Scientific
​
American​. Retrieved from
https://www.scientificamerican.com

Visit the College Board on the web: collegeboard.org.

DATA SCIENCE FOR SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE IN CHINA

/search/?q=China+launches+media+campaign+to+back+genetically+modified+crops
Plucknett, D., & Winkelmann, D. (1995). Technology for Sustainable Agriculture. Scientific
​
American,​ ​273(3),
​
182-186. Retrieved from http://www.jstor.org/stable/24981783
Ramos, P., Prieto, F., Montoya, E., & Oliveros, C. (2017, May). Automatic Fruit Count on
Coffee Branches Using Computer Vision. Computers and Electronics in Agriculture, 137,
9-22. Retrieved from https://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=3097101
Schuckers, M. (2016). Draft by Numbers: Using Data and Analytics to Improve National Hockey
League Player Selection. ​MIT Sloan Sports Analytics Conference​. Retrieved from
http://www.sloansportsconference.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/1559-Draft-by-Num
bers.pdf
Schwab, K. (2016, January 14). The Fourth Industrial Revolution: What It Means, How to
Respond. ​World Economic Forum.​ Retrieved from https://www.weforum.org/agenda/
2016/01/the-fourth-industrial-revolution-what-it-means-and-how-to-respond/
Simpson, W. (2016, January 26). The Importance of Population Forecasts for Your
Comprehensive Plan. ​MRSC of Washington.​ Retrieved from http://mrsc.org/Home/
Stay-Informed/MRSC-Insight/January-2016/The-Importance-of-Population-Forecasts-for
-your-Co.aspx
Stern, M. (2015, January 28). Data Science: The Next Revolution in Sustainable Agriculture. ​The
Climate Corporations​. Retrieved from https://climate.com/blog/data-science-thenext-revolution-in-sustainable-agriculture
Streitfeld, D. (2018, September 4). Amazon Hits $1,000,000,000,000 in Value, Following Apple.

Visit the College Board on the web: collegeboard.org.

DATA SCIENCE FOR SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE IN CHINA

The New York Times​. Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/04/
technology/amazon-stock-price-1-trillion-value.html
Tasmanian Institute of Agriculture. (2018, April 30). Australia-China Sustainable Agricultural
Technology Forum. ​Tasmanian Institute of Agriculture​. Retrieved from http://www.utas.
edu.au/tia/news-events/event/australia-china-sustainable-agricultural-technology-forum
Thatcher, M. (1989, November 8). Speech to United Nations General Assembly. Retrieved from
https://www.margaretthatcher.org/document/107817
United Nations. (2015). The Sustainable Development Agenda: 17 Goals to Transform Our
World. United
​
Nations​. Retrieved from https://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/
development-agenda/
University of California, Davis, Agricultural Sustainability Institute. (2019). Organic Farming.
University of California, Davis​. Retrieved from https://asi.ucdavis.edu/programs/
ucsarep/about/what-is-sustainable-agriculture/practices/organic-farming
Wolf, M. (2018, April 10). US-China Rivalry Will Shape the 21st Century. ​Financial Times​.
Retrieved from https://www.ft.com/content/5f796164-3be1-11e8-b9f9-de94fa33a81e
Yu, J., & Wu, J. (2018, May 29). The Sustainability of Agricultural Development in China: The
Agriculture–Environment Nexus. Sustainability
​
​. Retrieved from
file:///Users/kis/Downloads/sustainability-10-01776.pdf
Zhang, W., Dou, Z., He, P., Ju, X., Powlson, D., Chadwick, D., Norse, D., Lu, Y., Zhang, Y., &
Wu, L. (2013, May 21). New Technologies Reduce Greenhouse Gas Emissions From
Nitrogenous Fertilizer in China. ​Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America,​ 110. Retrieved
​
from https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1210447110
​

Visit the College Board on the web: collegeboard.org.