The Political Implications of the Privatization of Space

6443V02U
AP Seminar
Word Count: 1305

Introduction
According to NASA’s Chief Historian, Steven J. Dick, space exploration is a necessity
for self-preservation of society and avoidance of stagnation. The initial need for exploration of a
new frontier came with uncertainty and required the creation of new international agreements. In
1967, the United Nations’ Outer Space Treaty was signed by over one hundred countries, setting
in place two fundamental principles for international space law: 1) general international law
extends into space, and 2) celestial bodies are free for exploration and use but cannot be claimed
by any nation (Lee). This treaty specifically addressed individual countries. However, as a
half-century has passed, national space programs are no longer the only entities interested in
space exploration. With the introduction of NewSpace, the industry composed of many new
private space companies such as Elon Musk’s SpaceX and Jeff Bezo’s Blue Origin, the Outer
Space Treaty’s vague nature has made its enforcement increasingly complicated (Krause)
(Dovey). However, the importance of space exploration and scientific advancement remains. If
the private sector is able to aid scientific progress, it must be allowed to fulfill this purpose. Yet,
with the current nature of international space law, unspecified regulations pave a path for serious
international conflict rising from possible legal disputes and damages of intellectual property
(Reinert). Thus, when analyzing the privatization of space from a political standpoint, the
question arises: what does the current rise in private space companies in the United States
suggest about a need for government regulation of space exploration?

Promotion of Private Space Companies
While the introduction of private companies has complicated the space industry, it has
also introduced much opportunity. It is in the government’s interest to work alongside private

companies for the country’s scientific advancement, which yields political gain. In his research
on liability laws in outer space, Alexander P. Reinhart of William and Mary Law School
highlights that NASA no longer monopolizes the space industry. A second kind of space race is
occurring among private companies such as SpaceX, Blue Origin, and Virgin Galactic
(Reinhart). These companies are at the forefront of space technology with SpaceX becoming the
first private entity to deliver supplies to the International Space Station (Reinhart). Hence,
partnership with private companies provides state-of-the-art resources and technology needed by
the government. The U.S. therefore increases its capacity to advance science by utilizing private
space exploration endeavors. Furthermore, this technology provides political gain. According to
Harvard Law School researcher Yong Bum Lee, under the Registration Convention of the Outer
Space Treaty, private companies have the ability to register their intellectual property, or ‘space
objects’, under the country of their choosing, creating regulatory competition. Governments then
have incentive to adjust their patent framework to meet private company desires (Lee). Having
some authority over these corporations allows the country to obtain the wealth of knowledge
their technology provides. Knowledge then increases political prestige internationally while
partnership assists the private sector, creating a mutually beneficial relationship. However, it
creates conflicting governmental interests, meaning a decision between political prestige or
international integrity.
Along with this new technology comes unprecedented objectives in space for which the
government must account. Intending to work with and support private companies, the U.S.
government attempts to pass laws that specify its understanding of the Outer Space Treaty for the
NewSpace industry’s benefit. The American Space Commerce Free Enterprise Act was passed
by the House of Representatives in 2018; it is a bill seeking to allow private companies less

regulation and limitation of freedom in space. Hao Liu, Director at the Institute of Aviation Law
and Standard, and Fabio Tronchetti, Co-Director at the Institute of Space Law and Strategy,
argue that this bill does not fully align with the Outer Space Treaty’s basic foundation, allowing
U.S. citizens unconditional usage of resources from outer space (Hao and Tronchetti). The bill
instead removes the burden from the private space sector in the U.S. and is, therefore, a
governmental attempt to promote private space companies. Along with this Act, the ABA Journal
by the American Bar Association identifies an additional bill known as the American Space
Renaissance Act which seeks to specify the Outer Space Treaty’s interpretation in the U.S. It
looks to increase the budgets of the Department of Transportation and the Commerce
Department in order to grow their involvement in the protection of the commercial space
industry (Krause). The government promotes private space endeavors while aiming to protect the
companies responsible for them. Though intended to benefit the privatization of space, these acts
have created controversy internationally, and the U.S. government must therefore ensure
regulation and its own fidelity.

Government Regulation
Not only must the government oversee its relationship with private companies, but it
must also maintain authority through national regulations. Under the Outer Space Treaty, the
U.S. government has the responsibility to uphold international space law. Discussing intellectual
property laws in outer space, Julie D. Cromer Young, J.D., professor at American University
Washington College of Law, emphasized that the Outer Space Treaty sets overarching guidelines,
but individual countries create their own domestic laws on space exploration (Young).
Governments under the treaty have obligations to other countries, and therefore they must

regulate private companies to avoid inciting international legal issues stemming from contrasting
interpretations of the Outer Space Treaty. These issues include both vague patent and liability
laws. Lee expands on this idea, explaining that, because ‘space objects’ can be registered where
conditions are most beneficial to the company, there is a great chance of problems in which a
space company registers under one country, but services another where its technology infringes
upon patent laws (Lee). While regulatory competition is, in some cases, positive in promoting
the NewSpace industry, it can create international disputes based on domestic patent laws.
Similarly with liability laws, Reinert explains that companies are likely to register in a country
with the most lenient policies on intellectual property damages (Reinert). Under the Outer Space
Treaty, both national and private endeavors, along with their hazards, are the responsibility of the
state (Avveduto). However, the states offering lenient conditions are often less likely to pay
damages, jeopardizing the compensation of victims (Reinert). Thus, government regulation of
private space companies, as well as international collaboration, are critical in preventing
international space law complications.
The U.S. government must also ensure it does not become fully dependent upon
privatized companies for space exploration. Organizations such as NGOs, Non-Governmental
Organizations, which are not directly related to space exploration, are able to pressure the
government through lobbyists to pursue greater space exploration. In this way, government
organizations themselves are regulated (Reibaldi and Grimard). Thus, the importance of
maintaining a national space program remains. Young reinforces that national space programs
are more stable and are essential in the event that private actors cease cooperation with the
government, which could pose a safety threat (Young). Therefore government regulation and

agencies, as well as private companies, are necessary to fuel scientific advancement, the overall
goal of space exploration.

Conclusion
The U.S. government should overall regulate the privatization of space. While the Outer
Space Treaty should remain a foundation for international space law because of its altruistic
principles, it must be updated to fit the modern infrastructure of space exploration, accounting
for private companies (Krause). This includes solidifying patent and liability laws. The
implementation of global patent protection would mitigate degradation of patents from
international competition for private companies (Lee). Additionally, holding private entities
accountable for damages rather than their countries of origin would simplify and improve
liability laws in space (Reinert). While limited by the requirement of large-scale cooperation of
countries with individual, varying laws, these changes would make progress in updating the
Outer Space Treaty, and could ultimately assist in solving the political issues of modern
international space law brought about by the privatization of space.

Works Cited
Avveduto, Rosario. “Past, Present, and Future of Intellectual Property in Space: Old Answers to
New Questions.” Washington International Law Journal, vol. 29, no. 1, Dec. 2019, pp.
203–246. EBSCOhost,
search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=asn&AN=141353241&site=ehost-live.
Dick, Steven J. “The Importance of Exploration.” NASA.
www.nasa.gov/missions/solarsystem/Why_We_01pt1.html. Accessed 19 May 2021.
Dovey, Ceridwen. “The Privatisation of Space: Does NewSpace Create Companies or Cults?”
Journal & Proceedings of the Royal Society of New South Wales, vol. 153, no. 1, July
2020, pp. 97–99. EBSCOhost,
search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=asn&AN=145102939&site=ehost-live.
Hao, Liu, and Fabio Tronchetti. “The American Space Commerce Free Enterprise Act of 2017:
The Latest Step in Regulating the Space Resources Utilization Industry or Something
More?” Space Policy, vol. 47, Feb. 2019, pp. 1–6. EBSCOhost,
doi:10.1016/j.spacepol.2018.02.004.
Krause, Jason. “The Outer Space Treaty Turns 50. Can It Survive a New Space Race?” ABA
Journal, Apr. 2017, p. 1. EBSCOhost,
search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=asn&AN=122282645&site=ehost-live.
Lee, Yong Bum. “Public Space, Private Patents: Updating International Space Law to Protect
Patents in Outer Space.” Harvard Journal of Law & Technology, vol. 33, no. 1, Fall 2019,
pp. 293–209. EBSCOhost,
search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=asn&AN=142243762&site=ehost-live.

Reibaldi, Giuseppe, and Max Grimard. “Non-Governmental Organizations Importance and
Future Role in Space Exploration.” Acta Astronautica, vol. 114, Sept. 2015, pp. 130–137.
EBSCOhost, doi:10.1016/j.actaastro.2015.04.023.
Reinert, Alexander P. “Updating the Liability Regime in Outer Space: Why Spacefaring
Companies Should Be Internationally Liable for Their Space Objects.” William & Mary
Law Review, vol. 62, no. 1, Oct. 2020, pp. 325–356. EBSCOhost,
search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=asn&AN=147242329&site=ehost-live.
Young, Julie D. Cromer. “Charting the Course of Intellectual Property Laws in the Privatization
of Outer Space.” Ateneo Law Journal, vol. 64, no. 3, Feb. 2020, pp. 925–948.
EBSCOhost,
search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=asn&AN=148294392&site=ehost-live.