Data Mining
Big Corporate Giants like Google are datamining our personal information and
using it for advertisements. It’s all underpinned by the same thing: the massive trove of
data that Google is collecting on billions of people every day. – Ben Popken (NBC News).
This issue is controversial because it is an important part of Google livelihood, yet it is an
invasion of privacy on the people. This issue is relevant today because compared to other
world problems, this one is still relatively new and with the Tech Industry booming, has
more light being shed on it by the day. Businesses, People of all ages, and even the
government. This can be mentally, politically, and socially harmful with your data being
data mined and seen by these corporate giants, they can use it to help in elections, it’s
existence makes you uneasy and maybe scared to use the internet and it harms just about
everyone making it social. I hope to find a solution that’ll help reduce the amount of data
mining going on.
Independent search engines will help protect you from “cookies” and data mining.
Ashish Mundhra, the staff writer for guiding tech is a supporter of duckduckgo and is
speaking about its benefits. This first and the foremost advantage of using DuckDuckGo is
their privacy policy. It does not collect or share personal information. No search record is
ever created on DuckDuckGo and thus no one can trace it back to you. – Ashish Mundhra
(Guiding Tech). This evidence is proving that there are independent search engines that
can be perfectly safe and still work just as good. My idea is that independent search engines
are safe alternatives to google, etc. and this evidence supports that perfectly. Google gleans
over all your search history and records the searches you have made across all its services.
“This first and the foremost advantage of using DuckDuckGo is their privacy policy. It

does not collect or share personal information. No search record is ever created on
DuckDuckGo and thus no one can trace it back to you.” (Guiding Tech). Google is using
our private information to send out ads and monitor what we search, whereas duckduckgo
does not. Even if you are not signed in and are searching as an anonymous user, Google
still records your computer’s IP data. “Google still records your computer’s IP data.”
(Guiding Tech). Google not only uses cookies and data mining, but they can also track you
with your IP making it virtually impossible to escape. Search Engines like DuckDuckGo
will go be bought out of business if they become too popular. DuckDuckGo is funded by the
people and has a supportive fan base that won’t be so easily bought out. Google and other
big corporate giants like Facebook, etc. are taking over and stealing our info and using it in
marketing for ads. But with independent search engines made by the people, for the people,
we can walk a new path without the constant stare.
“ In today’s fiercely competitive business environment, companies need to rapidly turn these
terabytes of raw data into significant insights into their customers and markets to guide their
marketing, investment.” (Abey Francis). Corporate companies are infringing on the rights of

the people by interfering with their personal data. “The use of data mining in this way is
not only considered unethical, but also illegal. Individuals need to be protected from any
unethical use of their personal information” (Francis) Datamining can destroy people’s
lives. Big companies can start losing customers or users because of privacy issues. “In data
mining, the privacy and legal issues that may result are the main keys to the growing
conflicts. The ways in which data mining can be used is raising questions regarding
privacy.”(Francis) When customers feel violated by the websites they use, they most likely
will switch to an alternative where they won’t feel so violated. Big corporate companies

need to data-mine to send out the right ads to the right people. Datamining might give you
ads that can relate to you but they d it off of just a search which might not be accurate and
also gives them access to other data than just the search. Being Misinformed can cause
extreme damage to someone’s life and yours, not only just people but also will damage
companies.
Facebook using our private data for more than just ads. Facebook is one of the
biggest data hoarders and something that no one would’ve expected. “Facebook would
accept such a compensation package lightly. Multiplying £5000 by 87 million soon adds up,
even for Facebook.” (Timothy Revell) Most of Facebook's wealth comes from the
accumulation of our data. When Facebook was first introduced, no one would’ve thought
that they would sell so much of our data. “It is still very difficult to get Facebook to truly
delete information it holds about you, and opting in to and out of certain aspects of the
platform is still very limited.” (Timothy Revell) We need to be more cautious and active in
new upcoming social media to make sure we have a safe alternative. Facebook owns so
much of our data they can sway election polls. “Facebook estimates that data from 87
million people ended up in the hands of Cambridge Analytica this way” (Timothy Revell)
With the majority of the population using social media like Facebook and putting their
views out through the platform, Facebook can use this and sell that data to advertisers that
work with politicians to sway elections. Facebook is a monopoly in social media and it has
become an important part of peoples lives. If we can get this problem into the light of
everyday people, then there will start to begin change and slowly more and more people
will begin moving to other social platforms and alternative search engines. Platforms

similar to Facebook or bought by Facebook are huge in collecting their users' data and
abusing it to even maybe sway an election by selling our personal information.
Datamining is a problem because it’s invading our privacy. Big corporate
companies like Google and Facebook are using our private information for their benefit.
Search Engines like DuckDuckGo and using other social media are great ways of dodging
the companies and becoming less of a target. We need to get this information out to the
people so that more people will use these alternatives. If we continue to not do anything
about this, there will be more and more data used to either sway elections, go against us in
job interviews, etc. Although billions of people already use Google and Facebook, we can
make a change with their platforms and direct people in the direction of privacy and safety.
The community would be much more private, employers at job interviews won’t pester you
with your past and elections will become more of a legitimate choice by the people. This is
the power of data mining for why we need to help prevent this.

Word Count: 1,182

Works Cited:
•
•
•
•

https://www.nbcnews.com/tech/tech-news/google-sells-future-powered-yourpersonal-data-n870501
https://www.newscientist.com/article/2166435-how-facebook-let-a-friend-pass-mydata-to-cambridge-analytica/
https://www.guidingtech.com/11797/5-reasons-to-search-web-with-duckduckgo/
https://www.mbaknol.com/information-systems-management/ethical-security-legaland-privacy-concerns-of-data-mining/