Cambodian Women in the Workforce: Generations of Change
AP Seminar
March 2020
Word Count: 1302

The Cambodian saying, “We don’t forget the old rice pot when we get the new one,” well
describes the situation women are facing in Cambodia (Hughes and Ojendal, 2006). Women in
Cambodia face unequal opportunities in the workforce due to gender disparity. Their present
situation is a tug-of-war between historical and cultural expectations of the past and increasing
social changes aimed at improving the future. The progress of women’s roles in the workforce is
hindered by the influence of older generations and cultural texts, such as the Chba’p Srei, which
moralize adherence to Cambodian tradition. However, recent social change in Cambodia may
counter this static culture significantly, creating opportunities for women to receive higher
education and take more control over their lives.
The Chba’p Srei, a Buddhist text defining the ideal woman as silent and subservient, is
often referenced as a code for the expectations of Cambodian women. Caroline Hughes, from the
University of Notre Dame, and Joakim Ojendal, a Ph.D. in Peace and Development Research,
wrote about a historical connection to the importance of the Chba’p Srei. During the Khmer
Rouge, “social rupture” caused a ban on many cultural texts, including the Chba’p Srei. In years
following, the Chba’p Srei was restored as a symbol of Cambodian culture, even “paraded […]
as a form of resistance to French colonial influence” (Hughes and Ojendal, 2006). Thus, the
traditional expectations for Cambodian women are deeply rooted in national identity; to diverge
from their teachings is to become as the foreigners. As University of London human geography
professor Katherine Brickell commented: “Not only is Cambodian culture widely portrayed as
stifling efforts at political reform, it is also regarded as unchanging itself” (Brickell, 2011). The
reinforcement of the code and the static nature of the culture make the gender expectations
difficult to escape. In an article from the Phnom Penh Post, Leabphea Chin (a Young Research
Fellow at Future Forum) explains how in 2007, the Ministry of Women’s Affairs asked that the

Chba’p Srei no longer be taught in Cambodian schools. However, only parts of the text were
removed, and a shorter version of the Chba’p Srei remains in the curriculum for grades seven to
nine (Chin, 2019). The continued teaching of the Chba’p Srei perpetuates gender norms in a
cycle that inhibits women’s roles. If girls grow up believing they must behave as told in the
Chba’p Srei, they may believe it unacceptable to pursue specific careers. Brickell (2011) claimed
the progress of women’s roles in the workforce is also limited because they feel pressure to
maintain a consistent role in both family and society, due to the varied expectations. The cultural
background of Cambodian society provides insight to the significant roadblocks to the
advancement of women’s roles in the workforce.
The gap between generations further demonstrates the pull between tradition and
changing social norms. Traditionally, Cambodian families do not support careers for women that
are seen as ‘a man’s job’ or that may portray their daughters as lacking virtue. Cambodian
actress Lida Duch described her mother’s beliefs to the Southeast Asia Globe art and journalism
magazine. She said: “My mum didn’t support me. She never wanted me to pursue a career in
film […] She just wanted me to get a normal job” (Black and Len, 2018). Duch’s experience
demonstrates how the older generation advises youth to conform to tradition rather than defy it.
According to Dr. Judy Ledgerwood, an anthropologist from Northern Illinois University, many
homes in rural Cambodia are multigenerational—especially after the Khmer Rouge, which broke
apart families and forced together extended relatives (Ledgerwood, n.d.). Surrounded by elder
relatives with rigid views on culture and tradition, young women living in these
multigenerational homes face difficulties in choosing their own career paths in life.
Interestingly, however, Ledgerwood observed a shift in decision-making factors in the
newer generations when interviewing Khmer women in the 1980s. The women agreed that

adhering to cultural norms was “of critical importance,” but when asked how their lives differed
from their mothers, “hard economic realities” were a greater concern than “concern with social
status or gender ideals,” (Ledgerwood, n.d.). Ledgerwood observed that “…although the ideals
are maintained as ideals, circumstances require that women act in bold ways, like coming to
Phnom Penh to work as construction laborers or factory workers on their own” (Ledgerwood,
2002). Lida Duch has noted a similar shift: “It feels like a movement is developing. Parents are
more open-minded about their children pursuing careers in the film industry, and people are
getting more exposure” (Black and Len, 2018). While Duch’s perspective may not apply to all
industries, it seems clear that the gap is gradually closing with each generation. While progress
may be slower for women in rural areas due to isolation and less access to education, the urban
area is beginning to see increasing acceptance of new careers for women.
Improvement of the accessibility of education for Cambodian girls has a significant
impact on advancement in the workforce. Ledgerwood references the Cambodian Secretariat of
State for Women’s Affairs 1995 data, saying that only 15% of Cambodian students in higher
education were women, due to traditional values favoring the education of boys (Ledgerwood,
n.d.). However, the World Bank reports that in 2017, 12% of Cambodian women were enrolled
in tertiary education, compared to the 14% of men (World Bank, n.d.), showing a clear change to
increasing balance between men and women in higher education since 1995. As girls receive
increasingly equitable education, the rising generations of Cambodian women are better
equipped and motivated to speak up about what still needs to be done for them to experience
equality in the workforce. Lida Duch is one of few actresses to “defy the country’s prevailing
definition of femininity” despite the drawbacks it has on her career (Black and Len, 2018).
Although speaking up may be deemed unacceptable, women with a voice are pushing for

change. Thus, Cambodian women have experienced increasing mobility and authority in their
lives, particularly in urban locations. Women make up 90% of the garment industry in Cambodia
(Chin, 2019). These women migrate from the countryside to the city, where they live together
with other working women. They make their own money, live independently from
multigenerational families and male relatives, and are free to choose their own future “in a way
impossible in the past” (Ledgerwood, n.d.). These Cambodian women may not hold decisionmaking careers, but their jobs provide increasing power to make decisions in their own lives.
Despite these promising changes, there is still more progress to be made. A 26-year-old
Cambodian woman, Vannary, said: “If we live far from the past, we will be criticized” (Hughes
and Ojendal, 2006). But, with each generation of progress, women in Cambodia come closer to
equality than before. It is a step (or rather, many steps) in the right direction. Jenny Pearson, the
founding director of the VBNK NGO in Cambodia, wrote a peer-reviewed article about a
“women’s empowerment process” she led with a group of Cambodian women (Pearson, 2011).
She discusses Cambodian culture, the psychological effect of the Khmer Rouge, and other
factors that influence the way Cambodian women play a role in the workforce. From her
perspective, the “empowerment process” made “no visible difference” (Pearson, 2011). Yet, she
concluded with this: “The difference may yet become visible—but in Cambodian daughters,
rather than their mothers” (Pearson, 2011). Progress is happening one generation at a time, and
while it might not seem visible yet, it soon will be. Gender equality in every aspect will advance
with each generation of change, as men and women strive to promote equal treatment and
opportunities for women. The role of women in Cambodia’s workforce has come far since the
Khmer Rouge ended in 1975, and it still has a way to go—but things are looking up.

Works Cited
Black, Euan, and Leng Len. Meet the Cambodian Actress Shaking up Social Norms. Southeast
Asia Globe, 12 June 2019, southeastasiaglobe.com/cambodian-actress-shaking-up-socialnorms/.
Brickell, Katherine. “‘We Don’t Forget the Old Rice Pot When We Get the New One’:
Discourses on Ideals and Practices of Women in Contemporary Cambodia.” Signs, vol.
36, no. 2, 2011, pp. 437–462. JSTOR, www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/655915. Accessed 9
Feb. 2020.
Chin, Leabphea. “Addressing Stereotypes: Harmful Gender Norms in Cambodia.” Addressing
Stereotypes: Harmful Gender Norms in Cambodia | Phnom Penh Post, Phnom Penh Post,
18 Aug. 2019, www.phnompenhpost.com/opinion/addressing-stereotypes-harmfulgender-norms-cambodia.
Hughes, Caroline, and Joakim Öjendal. “Reassessing Tradition in Times of Political Change:
Post-War Cambodia Reconsidered.” Journal of Southeast Asian Studies, vol. 37, no. 3,
2006, pp. 415–420. JSTOR, www.jstor.org/stable/20071784. Accessed 9 Feb. 2020.
Ledgerwood, Judy. “Women in Cambodian Society.” Women in Cambodian Society, Northern
Illinois University, n.d., www.seasite.niu.edu/khmer/ledgerwood/women.htm.
Pearson, Jenny. “No Visible Difference: A Women's Empowerment Process in a Cambodian
NGO.” Development in Practice, vol. 21, no. 3, 2011, pp. 392–404.,
www.jstor.org/stable/23048603. Accessed 9 Feb. 2020.
World Bank. “Country at a Glance - Cambodia.” Education Statistics, United Nations, n.d.,
datatopics.worldbank.org/education/country/cambodia.