AP Seminar
1/25/18
Hazing and the Law
In February of 2017, Penn State sophomore, Timothy Piazza, died as a result of a
collapsed lung, ruptured spleen, and irreparable brain damage. After a night of forced pledge
drinking, the consumption of mass quantities of alcohol with intent to ‘induct’ Piazza into the
Penn State chapter of Beta Theta Pi, intoxicated Piazza fell down stairs, and the other fraternity
members failed to call an ambulance or authorities until 12 hours after he had fallen (Snyder,
2017). As of November of 2017, seventeen Beta Theta Pi fraternity members have been charged
in connection with the event, charges ranging from giving alcohol to a minor to involuntary
manslaughter and aggravated assault, as well as hazing (Shapiro, 2017). Hazing is a buzzword
without a solid definition, a word that without context is hard to apply. Merriam-Webster defines
hazing as “the action of hazing; especially: an initiation process involving harassment.”.
However, this does not begin to define its ramifications in current society. A 2008 University of
Maine National Study reported that 55% of university students report being hazed at some point
in their college careers (Allan et al, 14). The Penn State case has brought the question of hazing
law and it’s meaningful prevention of tragedies like this back into the limelight. On every legal
level, the legal definition of what constitutes as hazing and what the punishments should be are
under scrutiny. But perhaps most importantly what can legally be done to further prevent hazing
deaths.
One of the major questions of this debate is what exactly can be defined as hazing in a
court of law. In Pennsylvania state statute § 5352 regarding hazing outlines a “ definition” some

Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org.

of the actions that can be defined as hazing, it includes any brutality of a physical
nature—whipping, beating, branding, etc—forced consumption of any food, liquor, or drug,
sleep deprivation, embarrassing situations or conduct, or destruction or removal of public or
private property (Anti Hazing Law, P.L. 229, No. 31 Cl. 24) . However, in other states, such as
Indiana, hazing is vaguely defined as the conditional or consensual coercion of another person
“to perform an act that creates a substantial risk of bodily injury.” (Hazing; good faith reporting).
Currently, only 44 states have legal definitions and laws and statutes regarding hazing. Montana,
New Mexico, South Dakota, Wyoming, Alaska, and Hawaii all do not have hazing laws
(Interactive: Where is Hazing a Crime). In the states that do have hazing laws, there is a distinct
difference state to state regarding punishments on a state level. As defined by Pennsylvania
statute § 5352, hazing is a misdemeanor of the third degree, a charge punishable by up to one
year in prison a fine of up to $2,000. However, in California, hazing can either be a misdemeanor
or a felony based on the severity of the event, as defined by California Penal Code. In the event
or hazing resulting in a death or injury is a misdemeanor or felony, punishable by a fine and jail
time (PENAL CODE Chapter 9. Assault and Battery [240 - 248]). In fact, most punishment
varies highly from state to state.
This is one of the major controversies in hazing law, what the implications of
state-by-state variances in punishment and the question of what is too much and too little as far
as disciplinary action. In the Piazza Case, William Brennan, the attorney for one of the Beta
Theta Pi fraternity brothers, states that he believes that the charges are too severe for the crime
and stated, “Not every tragedy is a crime”(Snyder). In an equal but opposite measure, Hank
Newer, an associate professor of journalism and an expert in hazing with several books released

Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org.

on the subject states, “Hazing cases are not the same state to state, and that it has been a shame,
in my opinion, no legislator has put together a bipartisan and effective and constitutional
anti-hazing bill,” (Dostis). Some are seeking hazing laws that are fairer towards defendants, and
others believe they should be far more severe so as to prevent hazing.
Regardless or not if a state has hazing legislation, most universities have their own hazing
policies. Pennsylvania State University uses a nearly identical definition based on the state
statute, and also informs students that there are state laws regarding hazing (Hazing Information,
Penn State Student Union). At the University of New Mexico, despite the state itself not having a
hazing law or statute, the university outlines its hazing definition in a similar manner (UNM
Policy Against Hazing). In addition to state charges, colleges will include their own
punishments. Duke University’s hazing policy is outlined very clearly with three levels of
severity. The punishments for these are also clearly defined: “disciplinary probation, social
suspension, suspension of charter, restrictions on member recruitment and/or group activity,
removal of the individual from the group, loss of housing privileges, suspension, and/or
expulsion” on a basis of severity of the infraction (Duke Policies: Hazing). However, even on a
university level, this is under scrutiny, Dillard College President, Walter Kimbrough, said in a
2012 article for Presidency magazine that he believes more steps need to be taken on the behalfs
of universities to create zero tolerance hazing protocols; concise definitions with concise
punishments. He states, “Bear in mind that if ‘zero tolerance’ does not mean suspension or
expulsion, it is not truly a zero-tolerance policy.”. However, Kimbrough also states that he
believes there is a difference between what should be in university jurisdiction and what should

Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org.

be in the hands of authorities, thus again leading into the question of the uneven state to state
hazing laws.
With both a university and state level of hazing policy called into question in light of the
Piazza case, the idea for new federal legislation has been introduced, including the REACH bill.
The REACH act proposed by Representative Patrick Meehan would create a national definition
for hazing (Snyder). It would require universities to report hazing incidents to authorities as well
provide on-campus hazing education. So as to take into account all opinions in this argument a
comprehensive study is being done into on-campus crime and hazing reports to better
understanding hazing trends. (Carter)
As of the current era, it can be seen that recent events and a past that supports a
disturbing trend in hazing deaths and injuries has spurred a new era of debate regarding hazing
law. Though there are those who support hazings’ place in Greek life on campus,
overwhelmingly there is a movement to better define and punish it so as to prevent further
tragedies on a meaningful, national scale.

Word Count: 1104

Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org.

References
Allan, Elizabeth J., and Mary Madden. Hazing
​
in View: College Students at Risk.​ University of
Maine, 2008, pp. 1–52, Hazing
​
in View: College Students at Risk.​
ANTI HAZING LAW - ENFORCEMENT Act of May. 24, 2016,P.L. 229, No. 31 Cl. 24
Carter, S. Daniel. “Bi-Partisan Anti-Hazing Bill In Congress Draws Widespread Support.” The
​
Huffington Post,​ TheHuffingtonPost.com, 21 June 2017,
www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/bi-partisan-anti-hazing-bill-in-congress-draws-widespread_us_5
94ac56ce4b062254f3a5b0a.
Dostis, Melanie. “Hazing Embedded in College Culture?” USA
​
Today,​ Gannett Satellite
Information Network, 21 Nov. 2013,
“Duke Policies: Hazing.” ​Duke,​ policies.duke.edu/students/universitywide/hazing.php.
HAZING; GOOD FAITH REPORTING Act of 2015, IC 35-42-2-2.5,
“Hazing Information.” Fraternity
​
& Sorority Life | Hazing Information,​ 2017,
studentaffairs.psu.edu/hub/greeks/hazing.shtml.
“Interactive: Where Hazing Is a Crime in the U.S.” ​NBCNews.com​, NBCUniversal News Group,
18 Sept. 2017,
www.nbcnews.com/storyline/hazing-in-america/interactive-where-hazing-crime-u
-s-n801796.

Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org.

Jackson, Abby. “Hazing Is Nothing New - Fraternities Have Been Beating and Force-Feeding
Pledges since Colonial Times.” Business
​
Insider,​ Business Insider, 30 Sept. 2017,
www.businessinsider.com/fraternities-hazing-pledges-history-2017-9​.
Kimbrough, Walter. "Handling Hazing." ​Presidency,​ Fall 2012, pp. 1-3. EBSCOhost,
​
​
search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=a9h&AN=93681798&site=eho
st-live.
Parks, Gregory Scott, et al. “Hazing as Crime: An Empirical Analysis of Criminological
Antecedents.” By
​ Gregory Scott Parks, Shayne E. Jones, Matthew W. Hughey ::
SSRN,​ 7 Mar. 2014, papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2405079.
Shapiro, Emily. “Former Penn State Fraternity Brothers Face New Charges in Hazing Death.”
ABC News,​ ABC News Network, 13 Nov. 2017,
abcnews.go.com/US/charges-penn-state-hazing-death/story?id=51112120.
Snyder, Susan. “Meehan Proposes Federal Legislation on Hazing.” ​Philly.com​, 16 June 2017,
www.philly.com/philly/education/meehan-proposes-federal-legislation-on-hazing
-20170616.html.
Snyder, Susan. “Penn State Frat Death Raises Questions for Grieving Parents.” Philly.com,
​
​
Philadelphia Media Network LLC, 9 Apr. 2017,
www.philly.com/philly/education/Frat-death-raises-questions-for-grieving-parents
.html​.
Svrluga, Susan. “New Charges Brought in Penn State Hazing Death after Deleted Video Is
Recovered.” The
​
Washington Post,​ WP Company, 15 Nov. 2017,

Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org.

“The Pathfinder - UNM Student Handbook.” ​UNM Policy Against Hazing :: The Pathfinder UNM Student Handbook | The University of New Mexico,​
pathfinder.unm.edu/campus-policies/unm-policy-against-hazing.html.
PENAL CODE Chapter 9. Assault and Battery [240 - 248]- Act of 1872
“Why Do People Haze?” Stop
​
Hazing | Georgetown University,​
stophazing.georgetown.edu/why-do-people-haze.

Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org.