Running head: DEINSTITUTIONALZATION: LEAVING PATIENTS BEHIND

Deinstitutionalization: Leaving Patients Behind
AP Seminar

Word Count: 1306

Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org.

DEINSTITUTIONALZATION: LEAVING PATIENTS BEHIND

Introduction
News of the deinstitutionalization movement has passed by, unnoticed since its
commencement in the 1960’s. However, growing concerns over poverty, prison overcrowding,
and civil rights of mentally disabled patients call for recognition and deep understanding of
deinstitutionalization as a major contributor to these problems. According to Lamb, a professor
at University of Southern California School of Medicine, Los Angeles and Bachrach, veteran
author of 41 articles on the topic of deinstitutionalization, deinstitutionalization is defined as the
replacement of state or federal run psychiatric hospitals with community-based alternatives
(Lamb & Bachrach, 2001). The government implemented this policy of deinstitutionalization
because of “the belief that mental hospitals were cruel and inhumane, hope that new medications
[opposed to the ineffective treatment from the institutions] offered a cure, and the desire to save
money” (Yohanna, 2013). Overall, the government expected deinstitutionalization to improve
the lives of the mentally ill. Since the commencement, the program strived to develop
independence among patients by increasing employment and interaction with others.
Unfortunately, these positive outcomes occur only where mental community services are wellestablished and maintained (Kliewer, McNally, & Trippany, n.d.). In actuality, a majority of the
released patients experience unintentional, negative consequences of deinstitutionalization such
as homelessness, incarceration, and isolation due to the absence of the promised community care.
Patient Homelessness
The absence and lack in quality of community-based mental programs contributes to the
failure of the deinstitutionalization movement to improve the lives of mental patients. The major
obstacle facing the success of deinstitutionalization is limited funding for mental centers which
results in an unprofessional staff and ineffective services (Kliewer, McNally, & Trippany, n.d.).

Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org.

DEINSTITUTIONALZATION: LEAVING PATIENTS BEHIND

Flory and Friedrich, co-directors of the National Alliance for the Mentally Ill Long-term Care
Network, provide examples of the effects caused by limited funding through the complaints of
families who have directly experienced the unsuccessful community centers. Many described the
lack of 24-hour supervision when needed. They also delineate their experience with the
revolving door syndrome, the frequent transportation of patients caused by the lack of adequate
housing. One woman explains how her schizophrenic son had been moved in the system 62
times; thus, her son remained ill for 20 years due to lack of treatment (Flory & Friedrich 1999).
Revolving door syndrome causes patient instability and leads to forced homelessness because of
the brief treatment duration and forced discharge from government institutions. Madianos,
president of the World Association for Psychosocial Rehabilitation and professor of general and
social psychiatry at the University of Athens, delineates the direct correlation between the
economic level of a country and availability of mental health programs; only 51.7% of the
impoverished countries had available services while 97.4% of the wealthy countries had
available services (Madianos, 2010). Thus, his study supports the concept that community
services assist countries in escaping poverty by housing and treating the mental patients who
make up “a third to a half of all homeless adults” (Lamb & Bachrach, 2001). The failure of the
deinstitutionalization movement caused by insufficient funding of community mental centers
results in increased patient homelessness after they experience the revolving door and realize
they have no place to stay.
Increased Crime Rate and Prison Overflow
Patient homelessness caused by deinstitutionalization leads to increased crime rates
among the mental patients. Often they resort to crime in order to purposefully go to jail where
they can be fed and housed. In fact, in a survey conducted by Smith (2012), an editor of the

Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org.

DEINSTITUTIONALZATION: LEAVING PATIENTS BEHIND

Sociology Compass journal, it was found that “around 40 percent of severely mentally ill people
have been arrested at least once in their lives.” Additionally, patients’ untreated mental illnesses
can also influence them to commit severe crimes. For example, up to 50 percent of mass
homicides have been associated with people suffering from serious mental illnesses (Treatment
Advocacy Center). Providing more evidence of increased crime, Wallace, Mullen, and Burgess
(2004) conducted a study where they examined the frequency of offenses among schizophrenic
patients over a 25-year period during the deinstitutionalization experience. They discovered that
the patients’ rate of offending rose from 7.4 percent in 1975 to 11.9 percent in 1995. Therefore,
deinstitutionalization set an impetus for the increase crime rate of mental patients. As a result of
the increased crime rate, deinstitutionalization also contributes to the overcrowding of prisons.
For example, “[m]ore than 1.8 million people with SMI [severe mental illnesses] are booked into
jails every year” (Treatment Advocacy Center, n.d.). Flory and Friedrich (1999) add that there
happen to be more mental patients in jail than patients receiving proper treatment. In the
prevention of prison overflow and crime, deinstitutionalization should be stopped or carried out a
different way.
Isolation and Suicide
Patients who avoid homelessness or imprisonment often experience isolation from
society which could eventually lead to suicide. Successful recovery and functioning of mental
patients depend on the material assistance and emotional support provided by the community as
stated by Bachrach (1976) in her book Deinstitutionalization: An analytical review and
sociological perspective published by the National Institute of National Health. However, when
mental patients are forced into community settings, they often experience isolation from others.
Bachrach (1976) explains how there seems to be a “consensus that society has difficulty in

Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org.

DEINSTITUTIONALZATION: LEAVING PATIENTS BEHIND

dealing with the presence of mental patients in their midst.” Although the book was published in
the 1970’s, Bachrach provides an accurate reaction of the community to the mental patients since
the repercussions of the deinstitutionalization movement became prominent around this time
period. Additionally, Kliewer, McNally, and Trippany support Bachrach’s claim by suggesting
that “the community at large is frequently afraid of people with mental illness, believing them to
be dangerous. This belief often cause[s] rejection” of the patients through victimization and
harassment (Kliewer, McNaally, & Trippany, n.d.). Bachrach continues to give examples of the
methods many use to isolate the patients such as city ordinances, zoning codes, and unnecessary
police arrests (Bachrach, 1976). In a majority of the cases, isolation serves as an impetus for
suicide. In fact, “[u]p to 50% of those with schizophrenia or bipolar disorder attempt suicide”
(Treatment Advocacy Center, n.d.) and one in ten are successful in completing suicide (Flory &
Friedrich, 1999). Suffering from societal rejection and abandonment, mental patients resort to
suicide to “solve” their afflictions. As a solution, Richan and Eidelman (1975) propose that “[w]e
must not, however, spend a lot of time in talking, writing, and holding conferences and seminars
on deinstitutionalization…. We must concentrate our efforts in [the] direction” of becoming
more active in improving and participating in community mental services. Richan and Eidelman,
journalists for the National Association of Social Workers, call for action to improve the
community services in order to prevent the suffering of mental patients because this journal
emphasizes the importance of social work in all different types of dire situations.
Conclusion
Despite the positive intentions of the deinstitutionalization programs, the commencement
has been followed by a majority of unintentional negative consequences. To prevent
ostracization of patients, wider understanding of mental illnesses should be implemented through

Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org.

DEINSTITUTIONALZATION: LEAVING PATIENTS BEHIND

educational programs for a higher chance of the social acceptance of the mentally disabled
patients. As a solution to the increased crime rates of mentally ill people and prison
overpopulation, Smith (2012) offers the plan of diverting some of the funds used by the criminal
justice system to handle the mentally ill people to the community mental services. With a
majority of the crime and inmate sources diverted towards community centers for treatment, the
criminal justice system would not need the full funds to manage its tasks. However, this plan
must be executed gradually as immediate transportation of the money would result in the
collapse of the criminal justice system. Thus, the responsibility is now in the hands of those who
are aware of this crisis to find a solution for these patients to live with the greatest degree of life,
liberty, and their pursuit of happiness.

Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org.

DEINSTITUTIONALZATION: LEAVING PATIENTS BEHIND

References
Bachrach, L. L. (1976). Deinstitutionalization: An analytical review and sociological
perspective. Retrieved from https://archive.org/details/deinstitutionali00bach
Flory, C., & Friedrich, R. M. (1999). Half a million liberated from institutions to community
settings without provision for long-term care. Retrieved from
http://mentalillnesspolicy.org/imd/deinstitutionalization-flory.html
Kliewer, S. P., McNally, M., & Trippany, R. L. (n.d.). Deinstitutionalization: Its impact on
community mental health centers and the seriously mentally ill. The Alabama Counseling
Association Journal, 35, 40-45. Retrieved January 24, 2017, from
http://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/EJ875402.pdf
Lamb, H. R., & Bachrach, L. L. (2001). Some perspectives on deinstitutionalization. Psychiatric
Services, 52(8), 1039-1045. doi:10.1176/appi.ps.52.8.1039
Lombrozo, T. (2015). Belief that mental illness can be contagious contributes to
isolation. Retrieved January 25, 2017, from
http://www.npr.org/sections/13.7/2015/08/17/432541935/belief-that-mental-illness-canbe-contagious-contributes-to-isolation
Madianos, M. (2010). Deinstitutionalization [Article]. Retrieved January 24, 2017, from
http://cirrie.buffalo.edu/encyclopedia/en/pdf/deinstitutionalization.pdf
Richan, W., & Eidelman, S. (1975). Deinstitutionalization. Social Work, 20(3), 254-255.
Retrieved from http://www.jstor.org/stable/23711310
Smith, C. (2012). Deinstitutionalization and the criminal justice system: An unfortunate

Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org.

DEINSTITUTIONALZATION: LEAVING PATIENTS BEHIND

Correlation [Article]. Retrieved January 24, 2017, from
https://thesocietypages.org/sociologylens/2012/07/03/deinstitutionalization-and-thecriminal-justice-system-an-unfortunate-correlation/
Treatment Advocacy Center. (n.d.). SMI & violence [Article]. Retrieved January 23, 2017, from
http://www.treatmentadvocacycenter.org/key-issues/violence
Wallace, C., Mullen, P. E., & Burgess, P. (2004). Criminal offending in schizophrenia over a
25-year period marked by deinstitutionalization and increasing prevalence of comorbid
substance use disorders. American Journal of Psychiatry,161(4), 716-727.
doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.161.4.716
Yohanna, D. (2013). Deinstitutionalization of people with mental illness: Causes and
consequences. AMA Journal of Ethics, 15, 886-891. Retrieved from
http://journalofethics.ama-assn.org/2013/10/pdf/mhst1-1310.pdf

Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org.