Performance Task 2 IWA
April 24, 2018
How Do Adult’s Perception of Video Games Affect Children?
Word Count: 1,827

​

Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org.

How Do Adult’s Perception of Video Games Affect Children.
Video games are one of the most popular sources of entertainment all over the world. It is
played by people of all ages nearly everyday. Due to the many amount of players, there are those
who do not play that raise many opinions of video games. Often children do not think of much of
video games besides that they are simply games to enjoy. Meanwhile those who are older and
more aware of consequences will pass judgement on the games and how they affect society.
Many adults will argue that video games are a negative influence for young children. An adult’s
perception of video games effects their children’s ability to play video games as they are the ones
purchasing the game and in control of their kids. Due to the many negative perception of video
games from parents, it will often lead parents to avoid buying their children video games.
However video games can be beneficial to everyone in multiple ways.
There are many mixed opinions about video games. Some adults believe that video
games are a waste of time. According to a survey conducted by PEW Research Center,
”Attitudes about video games,” found that “About one-quarter of all adults (26%) think most
video games are a waste of time, while a similar number (24%) do not​ think this is true of most
games. One-third thinks some video games are a waste of time while others are not, and 16% are
not sure. Whites (28%), those ages 65 or older (32%), and those with at least a high school
diploma (27%) are more likely than others to think most video games are a waste of time.”(
Duggan) Those who play games were also reported to agree with most positive depictions of
gaming while those who did not play mostly disagreed. The survey gave a general perception of
what different age groups, in the United States, thought of gaming with a fairly large amount of
adults believing that some games were a waste of time.

Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org.

​

The typical parent will also fear that when children play games, they develop unhealthy
habits such as becoming anti-social, staying indoors, and even becoming addicted to the games.
There is a wide variety of video gaming genres and types to choose from. One of these options is
“single player” where only one person gets to play. In this situation, a child can be so involved in
the game or personally prefer single player games that they become anti-social. When the child
becomes so interested in a game, they may invest all their time into it and choose to stay inside
playing it rather than going outside to interact with others and exercise. And last but not least,
when a child is so invested in a game they can become obsessed with it. The New York Times
article “Video Games: Diversion or a Danger''​ Dr. Michael Lewis, professor of psychiatry,
psychology and pediatrics at the Rutgers University Medical School-University of Medicine and
Dentistry of New Jersey states, “..the intensity of the experience is worrisome.'' The intensity and
exposure to violent graphics are what mainly worries adults. When playing, children are not
simply viewing an alien get killed, but they are the ones doing the killing. They are put in place
of the killers. The professor also addresses these common fears in parents, ''especially in children
between the ages of 2 and 6, when there is some concern about the nature of the construction of
reality. One of the dangers is that electronics can replicate reality in ways that mechanical games
can't. We must ask: What is the point at which the game seems to be real?''(Lewis) An adult’s
fear or worrying can cause certain actions in order to prevent dangerous or bad situations from
occurring. It is important for parents to make wise judgements in order to help their children. An
adult’s perception on the matter of video games greatly affects their children’s ability to play.
Despite all these negative beliefs, video games are actually proven to be beneficial for
children. They can be a learning tool because they strengthen a wide​ range of cognitive skills

Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org.

​

such as memory, spatial navigation, reasoning and perception. According
​
to the article “Do
​
action video games improve perception and cognition?“​ by Richard Walter, psychologist at
Beckman Institute for Advanced Science and Technology,​ “frequent
​
action game players
outperform non-gamers on a variety of perceptual and cognitive measures, and some studies
suggest that video game training enhances cognitive performance on tasks other than those
specific to the game.”(Walter) This shows that not only can a person who plays video game do
well in a situation pertaining to the game but also in other fields. If adults are more aware of
these benefits and willing to overlook other perspectives of gaming, children will be allowed to
play more games and eventually develop strong comprehensive skills they can use in school and
even in life.
One of the most popular misconceptions about video games is that violent video games
cause violent thoughts and actions. Violent video games have yet to be proven to cause violent
behaviors, therefore, this statement cannot be considered true. There is still ongoing research and
debate on whether or not violent games do cause violent tendencies in children. "However, to
understand the impact of video games on children's and adolescents' development, a more
balanced perspective is needed," Sabela Granic, Ph.D., of Radboud University Nijmegen in The
Netherlands tells “Video Game Play may provide learning, health, and social benefits, review
finds.” This means that even if violent games do cause a person to become violent, you must also
look at the benefits of playing violent video games. The media also plays a role in shaping one’s
perspectives. Many people will often believe the majority of stories on the news to be true
without questioning the credibility of the story or if the story is exaggerated. This can be a bad
habit as new stations will report more on negative events rather than positive ones. For example

Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org.

​

stories such as Adam Lanza, gunman of Sandy Hook elementary school. According to Daily
Mail “Did violent video game Call of Duty spark gun-crazed loner’s killing-spree?” the Sandy
Hook killer was reported to have been obsessed with the popular violent video game Call of
Duty. “The walls of his room, where he spent all his time, were covered with posters of guns and
tanks, according to a plumber who worked at the killer's home…”(Parkinson.) Adam Lanza was
believed to have played the game for hours in advance in preparation for the massacre. When
adults hear stories such as Adam’s they can become fearful and believe that children can become
violent threw playing such games. Parents should be able to make decisions for themselves and
their children rather than trusting what they see or hear on the news or from others. In the
Washington Post, “If video games spur gun violence, it’s only in the United States” by Philip
Bump, he states, “of the 200 countries with the highest rates of deaths from gun violence and the
100 countries that spend the most per capita on video games, only the United States is in the
upper quintile on both metrics. Otherwise, the global pattern mirrors what that Villanova
professor suggested about individual school shooters: More gaming correlates loosely to fewer
violent gun deaths.”(Bump) Therefore when you consider the two variables “interest in video
games” and “incidents of gun violence” from all around the world, there is not much connection
at all. Looking at data from every country, video games do not play a big role in gun violence
besides in the U.S. which as an amendment stating any citizen as the right to bear arm.
It is important for adults to have the correct understandings about video games, however
it is often times difficult to do so when they are not gamers and grew up differently. In the
interview “Attitudes Towards Muslim Women in the West,” with Lila Abu-Lughod, professor of
Anthropology and Women’s and Gender Studies at Columbia University in New York, professor

Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org.

​

Abu-Lughod addresses views of Islamic women. After the 9-11 attack in 2001, eyes have been
directed towards the Muslim society in an attempt to better understand the culture. “Many
aspects of societies around the world cannot be understood without reference to the history and
influences of the major religions in terms of which people live their lives.” (Abu-Lughod) In
other words, she is saying that without the correct knowledge and history of why people do what
they do, we cannot fully understand their actions. So adults who do not play games can not
understand the perspectives of the gamers. It is hard to understand what you have not
experienced or be interested in the topic which can lead to misjudgements. Mental health
professional, Victoria
​
L. Dunckley M.D. states in her article “This is Your Child’s Brain on
Video Games” Parents need to learn the science behind how screen-time over stimulates the
nervous system, how this manifests as an array of symptoms and dysfunction, and what that

​ By learning the information, parents can change the course of their
looks like in their own child.”
​
child’s life. The information helps parents to make informed and mindful screen management
decisions, and balances different perceptions so that they can be kept from being swayed by
society and misleading media.
There are many ways to manage game play in children. As parents would like for their
children to develop many cognitive skills, they do not want their children to be affected by the
negative consequences of playing video games. First and foremost, the adult must have a clear
understanding as to how video games actually affect kids-both positive and negative aspects.
From there adults can decide and manage their children’s game play. There are a wide variety of
games to choose from; racing, adventure, first-person shooter, puzzles and strategy, and sports.
There are also different medias for game play; phones, tablets, consoles, and desktops. By

Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org.

​

managing a child’s game time, adults can prevent the possibility of their child becoming addicted
to the game.​ Michael
​
Manos, PhD,​ Head of the Center for Pediatric Behavioral Health at
Cleveland Clinic Children’s Hospital,​ says in the article “Managing Video game and Tv Time
for Children,” “children from
​ about ages 3 to 10 should be limited to one hour of screen time a
day (including video games, the computer and TV) for anything other than schoolwork.” So it is
not even recommended for a kid to spend long time playing games anyways. An adult’s view of
video games are very important when impacting their child’s life and development ages. Kids are
not old enough to make wise judgements so it is their guardian’s responsibility to make
judgements for them. Adults are the drivers therefore it is important for them to have the correct
information on a matter before taking actions for their kids.

​

Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org.

Works Cited
Duggan, Maeve. “3. Attitudes about Video Games.” Pew
​
Research Center: Internet, Science &
Tech,​ 15 Dec. 2015, www.pewinternet.org/2015/12/15/attitudes-about-video-games/.
​
​
Collins, Glenn. “VIDEO GAMES: DIVERSION OR A DANGER?” The
​
New York Times,​
The New York Times, 17 Feb. 1983,
www.nytimes.com/1983/02/17/garden/video-games-diversion-or-a-danger.html.
Richard, Walter, et al. “Do Action Video Games Improve Perception and Cognition?” ​Frontiers,​
Frontiers, 24 Aug. 2011, www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpsyg.2011.00226/full.
​
​
Granic, Sabela. “Video Game Play May Provide Learning, Health, and Social Benefits, Review
Finds.” Monitor
​
on Psychology,​ American Psychological Association, Feb. 2014,
www.apa.org/monitor/2014/02/video-game.aspx.​
Hartley-parkinson, Richard. “Did Violent Video Game Call of Duty Spark Gun-Crazed Loner's
Killing Spree? Adam Lanza 'Spent Hours with Game Just like Anders Breivik'.” Daily
​
Mail Online,​ Associated Newspapers, 3 Jan. 2013,
www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2249854/Sandy-Hook-school-shooting-Adam-Lanza-s
pent-hours-playing-Call-Duty.html.​
Bump, Philip. “Analysis | If Video Games Spur Gun Violence, It's Only in the United States.”
The Washington Post,​ WP Company, 8 Mar. 2018,
www.washingtonpost.com/news/politics/wp/2018/02/22/if-video-games-spur-gun-violen
ce-its-only-in-the-united-states/?noredirect=on.

Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org.

​

Abu-Lughod, Lila. “Lila Abu-Lughod on Attitudes Toward Muslim Women in the West.”
Asia Society,​ 20 May 2002,
asiasociety.org/lila-abu-lughod-attitudes-toward-muslim-women-west.
Dunckley, Victoria L. “This Is Your Child's Brain on Video Games.” Psychology
​
Today,​ Sussex
Publishers, 25 Sept. 2016,
www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/mental-wealth/201609/is-your-childs-brain-video-ga
mes.
Children's Health Team. “Managing Video Game and TV Time for Children.” ​Health Essentials
from Cleveland Clinic,​ Health Essentials from Cleveland Clinic, 20 July 2015,
health.clevelandclinic.org/managing-video-game-and-tv-time-for-children/.

​

Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org.