What Changes Can Be Made to Animal Testing for Pharmaceuticals: The Political
Considerations
Animal testing has been used since 384 BC to explore medicines and procedures not yet
ready for human testing or use. An alternative, in vitro, has recently become more available in
replacing animal testing however the effectiveness is not fully known. For the well-being of
society, testing experimental medicines is necessary. While government has taken steps such as
creating regulations and reducing toxic medical animal testing to appease many social groups
against it, since their are not many alternatives as effective as animal testing, the government has
incentive to continue in vivo, testing on whole living organisms. Animal testing’s history and its
current reliability shows no alternative will replace it any time soon.
The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) already have regulations created to protect animals, give them a feasible living
environment and ensure the testing is for a viable reason, including the Good Laboratory Practice
for Nonclinical Laboratory Studies (FDA) . This law verifies the treatment of animals is proper
and tests are being rendered for purposes that discover new information about medical products
or diseases (FDA). Performing tests on animals is needed to know how a medicine is broken
down chemically in the body, how quickly it is metabolized, how it is absorbed into the blood,
and much more. By establishing regulations, the government can continue research while
reassuring opposing groups that the top priority is for the animals and their safety. Ultimately,
the FDA supports efforts to find alternatives to animal testing however, animal testing is
necessary because other options have yet to be proven effective (FDA). The U.S. Government
has explored alternatives including in vitro toxicology which is tests
​
derived from cultured

Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org.

human skin cells and in stimulus which
​
is​ a detectable change in the internal or external
environment,​ but have not found any as accurate and easily available as in vivo. In 1937 before
testing drugs on animals was required, a medicine containing elixir sulfanilamide was created not
knowing it was poisonous, causing the deaths of over 100 people. In response the 1938 Federal
Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act was created which given required the testing of the safety of a
drug before its distribution (NIH). The government created this act and began testing medicines
before human use after these deaths to prevent any future catastrophes. Testing is vital and
without the protection of the rights to do so given by the government, people can contract
diseases or unknowingly take lethal drugs.
Social and scientific groups that defend medical animal testing have helped contribute to
the public’s understanding of why in vivo is so vital. The Foundation for Biomedical Research
(FBR) promotes the public’s knowledge of the past and present medical and scientific research
and its importance to society. Frankie Trull, a graduate of Tufts and Boston university, and the
President of the FBR acknowledges alternatives but by comparing all the milestones in vivo has
made that nothing has yet come close to completely replacing animal testing (Trull).
Immunizations for polio and hepatitis were founded by researching on animals and helped save
millions since. The American Cancer Society has also been public about their use of animal
testing, acknowledging the accuracy when it comes to how medicines are digested within a body
system (ACS). Groups like the FBR and Speaking of Research, support animal testing for its
necessity to medical advancement and the finding of treatments including penicillin, insulin,
blood transfusions, and many more that have saved millions of lives. The cell culture testing
alternative was explored and was successful, leading to the belief of more and better options

Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org.

available. However, there is more to consider including the economics of switching to the use of
in vitro and in stimulus, its practicality, and the accuracy of alternatives. After centuries of
animal testing, changing of these processes can be done but is not needed because animal testing
has worked before and is still successful.
Some argue that animal testing is not more effective than alternatives and it costs much
more. Many social groups, including People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) and
New England Anti-Vivisection Society (NEAVS) primarily use ethics and morals to convince
society that animal’s rights are being violated by the government. The
​
public’s support of these
groups lead to protests, wavers, and congress votes. PETA is one of the most well-known groups
opposed to the testing of animals, among other issues, with more than 5 million members and
supporters. The organization supports many other alternatives, including in vitro to test a
medicine’s effect on the body (PETA). According to a cost comparison done by the Humane
Society International (HSI), the costs of in vitro testing is thousands of dollars less than testing
on animals (RSS). The costs are much lower but the effectiveness of these alternatives have had
no conclusive results yet on its comparisons to animal testing. The risks of a treatment’s
accuracy being taken over paying more money is a risk animal rights groups are trying to
convince society is practical. NEAVS
​
​supports alternatives to animal testing and advancement of
science education of animals. Their website lists benefits of alternative options, including saving
money, having more precise information in some cases, and generating a more eco-friendly
environment through the non-disposability of hazardous waste of animals that died due to testing
(NEAVS). The linking of glass fibers and cancer was researched on animals in a 1991 study by
the Occupation Health and Safety Administration (OSHA) and no link was found between the

Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org.

two. OSHA then tested the study on cultured human skin cells finding results that connected the
two and found the fibers to be carcinogenic. Hazard labels were planted on fiberglass being sold
to be able to warn people about the potential risks (OSHA). If only animal testing was relied on
and the effects on human cells was not looked at preventative action would not have taken place.
Changing what is being tested and on what can gather more accurate information. Looking at all
the alternatives is beneficial however due to all the good it has done animal testing should be the
main source of testing experimental pharmaceuticals.
It is apparent when looking at how much animal testing has helped in the past and the
government’s continued use that it is vital to medical research. Other options still should be
considered but it is impossible to replace testing on a body that has very similar organ systems
and functions similar to that of a human’s. With advances in science, alternatives to animal
testing are developing but to safely and effectively understand the effects of medical procedures
and experimental medicines, animal testing is an accurate choice that has been and can be relied
on.
Word Count: 1119

Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org.

Works Cited
"Alternatives to Animal Testing." PETA.
​
People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals, 2017.
Web. 30 Jan. 2017.
"Animal Research Saves Lives." Animal
​
Research Saves Lives. Web. 15 Feb. 2017.
"Costs of Animal and Non-Animal Testing : Humane Society International." RSS.
​
Web. 15 Feb.
2017.
​
"Look at the Science behind the Prevention Method." American
Cancer Society. Web. 15 Feb.
2017.
​
"Medical Benefits." Speaking
of Research. 06 Apr. 2016. Web. 15 Feb. 2017.
National Institutes of Health. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Web. 15 Feb.
2017.
​
"New EPA Guidance for Testing Pesticides Will Reduce Animal Testing." EPA.
Environmental
Protection Agency, 29 Nov. 2016. Web. 15 Feb. 2017.
​ Testing. Web.
Society, New England Anti-Vivisection. "Alternatives to Animals in Science." In
15 Feb. 2017.
​
"Sulfanilamide Disaster." Sulfanilamide
Disaster. Web. 15 Feb. 2017.
"UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF LABOR." ​11/19/1991 - Fiberglass and the HCS
Standard | Occupational Safety and Health Administration. United States Department of
Labor, 19 Nov. 1991. Web. 30 Jan. 2017.
​
"Why Are Animals Used for Testing Medical Products?" Why
Are Animals Used for Testing
Medical Products? Web. 15 Feb. 2017.

Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org.