Biodiversity Loss and Its Effects On Sustainability
According to Megan Nichols, “biodiversity is defined as the totality of genes, species and
ecosystems in a defined area” (Nichols). In other words, biodiversity is the variety of life on
earth at all levels, from genes to ecosystems, and can encompass the evolutionary, ecological,
and cultural processes that sustain life. However, biodiversity loss is being caused mainly from
deforestation. Biodiversity loss is the decrease of the totality of genes, species, and ecosystems in
a defined area. According to Edward Wilson, he describes biodiversity loss as “the scientific
problem of greatest immediate importance for humanity.” (Chen). An example of extreme
deforestation would be the Amazon Rainforest. In the article, ​Patterns of Forest Loss Per
Territorial Category In The Amazon Rainforest: Peru (2001-2006), ​Nelson Carlos Rosot states
in the past fifty years, 17% of the Amazon has been lost. The tipping point is 20%. Nelson
Carlos Rosot also states illegal logging is responsible for 50-90% of deforestation. With the
increasing amount of deforestation begins the decreasing of animal species. This is because
deforestation takes away the habitats of several species. A loss of species can lead to the decline
in the evolution of new species and recovery of ecosystems. Along with the decline in evolution
of new species, a loss of species can also lead anthropic land use. With all of these effects from
biodiversity, it leaves the question: How can we seek and act on solutions in order to decrease
the amount of biodiversity loss occurring?
According to Dillys Roe, declines in species evolution causes extinction which results in
long lasting effects. Roe also states the loss of species can threaten stability on which humans
depend. Lastly, anthropic land use can be an issue due to invasive species. Invasive species is

“an animal or plant that is introduced to a new environment that can grow quickly and adapt to a
variety of living conditions' ' (Lakicevic). Some examples include cheatgrass or garlic mustard.
Plants like those are responsible for 33.4% of animal extinctions. They are also responsible for
25.5% of plant extinctions. With invasive species being the cause of the high percentages of
extinctions, it is a big impact on biodiversity loss and causes the decrease of many species.
According to Cai, biodiversity loss can lead to inability to sustain medicines, ocean
wildlife, and adequate food and water. Cai states that half the plants that are used to make certain
medicines could be lost by 2050. Along with medicine, ocean wildlife provides up to three
billion people with food and has been depleted through human intervention. Lastly, adequate
food and water is crucial for maintaining a nutritious diet and many ecosystems are decreasing in
abundance. In order to prevent these issues from completely taking over, conservation laws were
put into state and help protect species. To go along with ocean wildlife, there is an act called the
Marine Mammal Protection Act in which protects and rehabilitates endangered mammals.
Another act is the ​Defender’s Act which helps prevent extinctions and promotes species’
recovery. With these acts, it gives protection to species and helps prevent human intervention
from affecting biodiversity.
Along with the inability to sustain medicines, ocean wildlife, and adequate food and
water, there is another rumbling issue. This comes with the rapid development of cities. The
rapid development of cities mainly affects birds dude to the mass amount of air pollution.
Currently, 33% of all houses in the United States live next to a forest. Due to the placement of
houses near birds habitats, it has caused 17% of all 800 American birds to decline. According to
Croce, “20% of all species on Audubon Society’s list of “common birds in decline” have lost at

least 50% of their populations since 1950.” (Croce). This shows just how big of an impact
building roads or cities is to the species that are inhabiting the area. In order to prevent this,
people need to be aware of their surroundings.
With this broad variety of causes of biodiversity loss, there are many approaches that can
be taken. One approach that stood out was the increase of oak trees. Oak trees are able to be
habitats for millions of species compared to some trees who are only able to inhabit a couple
hundred species. With this jurassic difference, it is important we make oak trees more available
so that animals that are endangered are able to be kept safe in their natural habitat. In order to
initiate the start of this solution, there are different aspects you have to consider. The most
significant being cost. Cost will affect cities' openness to implant the solution. The cheaper it is,
the more appealing it seems. First to obtain the seedlings, it would cost between $450-1,400.
Those prices might seem intimidating but after possessing the seedlings, it would only cost $250
per 1,000 seedlings to plant. However, if cities chose to implant the trees farther in development,
it changes the prices. For a fifteen inch oak tree, it would cost between $100-400. For a twelve
foot tree, it would be $1200-1900. Buying the trees farther in development can guarantee a
decent lifespan. As for a seedling, some could die and not grow past ten feet.
Implanting all these oaks also makes up for a major effect of biodiversity loss which is
deforestation. Deforestation takes away homes of many species. Deforestation costs $4-5 trillion
each year. Despite the negative impacts, organizations such as ​The United Nations’ Reducing
Emissions have raised $117 million dollars for deforestation reduction. According to
worldwildlife, the two main causes of deforestation are agriculture and illegal logging.

In conclusion, biodiversity is a majority overlooked issue in society. Many people don’t
realize how negatively it can affect our future. However, many organizations are working on
spreading awareness and implanting solutions. Unfortunately, if this continues and 20% of forest
is cut down, the rainforests water cycle will not be able to support the ecosystems that are there.
This will significantly impact the species that rely on the water cycle for living. It could make
some species potentially go extinct. Another issue in the future is the lack of evolution in plant
and animal species. This is because when taking away species habitats, it calls for endangered or
even extinction for species. This doesn’t allow for species to develop. Not only for species, this
also affects plants. Deforestation gets rid of the many plants and along with invasive species, the
plants are not able to grow or evolve in the environment. In the future, there are many concerns
about what can happen if awareness is not spread. More cities will be built over animal and plant
habitats and more invasive species are brought into developing areas. This goes back to another
major issue being human intervention. If humans were made more aware of tiny improvements
in lifestyle, it could majorly make a difference in biodiversity loss. It could prevent the need to
build more cities. It could make people more aware of invasive species in their area. Making
people more aware of the invasive species in their area will help decrease the spread of the
invasive species. Overall, it is important to act upon solutions and to promote awareness of
biodiversity loss.
Word Count: 1205

Works Cited
Chen, James M. “The Fragile Menagerie: Biodiversity Loss, Climate Change, and the Law.”
Indiana Law Journal, vol 93, no. 2, Spring 2018, pp. 303-367. EBSCOhost, search.
ebscohost.com/login. Aspx? direct=true & db= a9h&AN= 132598794 & site=ehost-live.
Croce, A., el at. “Evidence of Dramatic Biodiversity Loss in a Wet Biotope Calls for Urgent
Conservation Strategies.” Plant Biosystems, vol 126, no. 4, Dec 2012, pp. 827- 834. EBSCOhost,
doi:10. 1080//11263504.2012.692338.

Grove-Fanning, William. ​Biodiversity Loss, The Motivation Problem, and the Future of
Conservation Education in the United States. ​2011. EBSCOhost.
Hooper, David U., et al. “A Global Synthesis Reveals Biodiversity Loss as a Major Driver of
Ecosystem Change.” Nature, vol.486, no. 7401, June 2012, pp. 105-108. EBSCOhost,
doi:10.1038/nautre11118
Lakicevic, Milena D. and Emina M. Mladenovic. “Non-Native and Invasive Tree Species- Their
Impact on Biodiversity Loss” ​Matica Srpska Journal for Natural Sciences​, no. 134, Jan. 2018,
pp. 19-26. EBSCOhost.
Rendekova, Alena, et al, “Effects of Invasive Plant Species on Species Diversity: Implications on
Ruderal Vegetation in Bratislava City, Slovakia, Central Europe.” pp. 1-19, vol. 88, no. 2,
Summer 2019, EBSCOhost.com
Roe, Dillys, etc al. “Biodiversity Loss Is A Developmental Issue.” pubs.lled.org, IIED. Apr.
2019, pubs.iied.org/pdf/17636IIED.pdf.

Van Ryswysk, Brenda. “Invasive Species and Biodiversity.” Invasive Species and
Biodiversity-Conservation Halton, 2020, ​www.conservationhalton.ca