
Adama Kargbo
Mr. Fasani
AP Research
April 2024
Comparing the Mental Health Effects of Mandatory and Voluntary Military Service

A common misconception when it comes to the military is that the mental health system is just like every other mental health system, when in fact that is not the case. Studies are shown that the type of mental health that follows soldiers after participating and doing their term in war is a different type of suffering that most likely never gets fixed and progresses to being worse in the future. Now, hearing this information the first thing one might think of is voluntary enlistment in America, one would have never assumed that these men in the military were being forced to join which leads to forced trauma, right? In some parts of the world, this is the case. Countries such as South Korea, Iran, Egypt and Sweden are a part of the handful of countries that partake in mandatory military service. These laws are put in place as a precaution just in case the country was ever to be attacked, they would be ready to fight back. Now this may sound like a perfect law to be placed to protect the country, but has one ever thought about the after effects that comes with this decision that the government made for the people. This refers to men from third-world countries who are forced to fight in the military due to a lack of funds in their home country. The goal of this study is to focus on their mental health because they did not choose to work in this type of job, which results in a lot of trauma. The first key point that will be brought up is about an article which was called Child soldiers in the civil war in Sierra Leone. This article went in depth on how children in Sierra Leone were being recruited and taught how to fight including learning how to use guns while preparing for upcoming wars with their rivals. This horribly affected these children in the future because it completely changed the whole protectiveness of the kids view on life and their views on the world. The second key point that will be brought up is the comparison of American soldiers who have the privilege to pick if they would like to serve in the military or not. One might assume the mental health after effect would be the same, but that is not the case at all. The ways each of them suffer are different aspects, from the way they see the world, to the way they act and talk. My final key point is the resilience of both types of military men. Of course, military men in America suffer from a variety of mental problems after serving in the military, and they can be severely affected by it, but the difference between them and third-world countries is that they have the option to seek help and go through therapy, whereas third-world countries are forced to Man it out and live with the trauma for the rest of their lives. So the question that may be thought of while reading this paper is To What Extent Does Compulsory Military Service In Developing Countries Affect The Mental Well-Being Of Men Compared To Voluntary Enlistment In The United States?

Doing an in depth scan at the multiple approaches that were used for writing this research paper, there were quite a few options that were discovered. Besides all of them, the methods that this research paper mainly focused on were Repertory Grid Analysis, Context Analysis, and the Narrative method. First, it is mostly about the paper's content that it holds. Now to explain why these three specifically chose to be used to help find research in this paper. Repertory Grid Analysis is a method that most researchers use to understand how people see the world and think in their own perspective. For the research on military men forced to join versus those who chose to join, this method helps dig into their thoughts and experiences. It involves asking them to compare and talk about different aspects, like why they joined or what challenges they faced. Doing this type of research can help one figure out patterns and differences in how the two groups of military men view their time in the military. This info can then be used to get a hold of their feelings better, make policies that make sense, and improve communication among military veterans. This method would most likely be the main lead finding in this research because the research aims to go in depth on a personal level of how military men were forced to serve and their personal views on the topic of CMS (Compulsory Military Service). The second lead method is Narrative. In the context of research on military service, using narrative methods involves collecting and analyzing the personal stories of military men and exploring the reasons behind their choices and the impact on their lives. This approach can bring out a very diverse perspective within each group, recognizing men who have suffered, gone through challenges, and emotional experiences. By collecting these narratives, the research offers a more in-depth understanding of these many experiences of military men who were forced to join versus those who volunteered, this allows a overarching complete analysis of the topic. Multiple people's aspects have been gathered from different parts around the world which helps with getting different perspectives and views from all different types of soldiers. The last method that will be used is Context Analysis. This method is a researching method that involves examining and taking a close look into things. In the context of research on military service, a contextual analysis would consider the social, political, economic, and cultural factors that may have shaped the experiences of military men who were forced to join compared to those who volunteered. It helps provide an understanding of the background conditions that impact one's choices and experiences in the military. By putting context analysis into the research, this can uncover how different factors might have influenced the decisions and outcomes for both groups.

The data that has been collected for this research paper has to be very authentic and specific in the different areas that will be brought up. Some data that was collected is the percentage of countries that partake in compulsory military service and the big chunk of countries that do not partake in compulsory military service(CMS). A very important detail that some might skip over is the amount of countries that end up doing CMS is a big number. The number may not be as big as the number of countries with voluntary military service(VMS). It still expresses a major significance of how many countries have men struggling with mental health while being forced to fight in surprise dangerous wars that their country is going through. This data addresses the presence or absence of CMS (Compulsory Military Service) across various nations, alongside research findings. As you can see here the data on this chart shows that out of the 195 countries there is only research showing that 71 countries do partake in mandatory military service, 101 countries don't do mandatory military enlistment, and there are 56 countries that are unknown. This data was collected from the website Wisevoter where it shows all the countries that have been doing CMS for a while. The number of countries that do mandatory military service have a higher chance of them not being in the NATO. In the website Wisevoter it states Other nations with armed forces that belong to bigger organizations such as the European Union and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, or NATO, do not conscript their personnel, but rather promote military careers to recruit them (Wiseover). Some more data that was found from research is the fact that CMS dates back all the way to the point in time where kids were forced to also fight for their countries ranging from ages 8-13. A research study was conducted in an article called Child soldiers in the civil war in Sierra Leone and it states Although some of the children who have participated in the war have been volunteers, thousands more have been abducted and socialized via brute violence by both sides (Zach-Williams). Some results that were found state the following Self-reported rates of possible PTSD using standard cut-off points declined from 32% to 16% 4 years later (P<0.05). Symptoms of PTSD at baseline were significantly associated with war experiences (P<0.01) and post-conflict family abuse (P<0.001). Reliable improvement in symptoms was reported by 30% (Theresa S, et al).

The findings that were obtained while conducting this research is that individuals of all age backgrounds can get affected by this and that there is a reduced likelihood of seeking mental assistance when it comes to mental health with men. The military in general also has horrible effects such as alcohol addiction, PTSD, Depression, etc. NATO is a big part of this research because the research study answers the GAP question in this research which is Why hasn't America saved the children that are being forced to join the military and put them in children's mental health centers? Almost all of these countries that are in desperate need of help can't get help from America because they are not a part of NATO, to help them out.

To conclude what has been spoken about in this research paper thus far, The initial hypothesis of Men that do CMS having worst long term effects is overall true. Statistics show that even though voluntary enlistment has strong mental after effects and even shows signs of depression and drug abuse, America has mental institutes that the soldiers can check themselves into all paid by the government while men in 3rd world countries don't have the money or privilege to get help so they end up living with that burden for the rest of their lives. At the end of the day mental health is subjective and nobody has it worse than anybody when it comes to how people have trauma from any past events.

Works Cited
Betancourt, Theresa S., et al. Post-traumatic stress symptoms among former child soldiers in Sierra Leone: follow-up study. The British Journal of Psychiatry, vol. 2023, no. 3, 2023. Cambridge University Press.
Countries With Mandatory Military Service 2023. Wisevoter.
Hoge, Charles W., et al. Mental Health Problems, Use of Mental Health Services, and Attrition From Military Service After Returning From Deployment to Iraq or Afghanistan. Jama Network, 2006.
Lazar, Susan G. The Mental Health Needs of Military Service Members and Veterans. Guilford Press Periodicals, vol. 42, no. 3, 2014.
Zach-Williams, A. B. Child soldiers in the civil war in Sierra Leone. Review of African Political Economy, vol. 28, no. 87, 2007, pp. 73-82.
Capone, Francesca. Child Soldiers: The Expanding Practice of Minors Recruited to Become Foreign Fighters. SpringerLink, T.M.C. Asser Press.
Millner AJ; Ursano RJ; et al. Prior Mental Disorders and Lifetime Suicidal Behaviors among US Army Soldiers. Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior.
Ronald C. Kessler, PhD. DSM-IV Mental Disorders in the US Army. JAMA Psychiatry, JAMA Network.