
Carl Fahim
Joseph Fasani
Innovation High School
Word Count: 4,669
Due Date: April 29, 2024
Assessing the Stringency of the U.S. FDA in safeguarding Generation Z And future Generations quality of life through Food, Drugs and Public Actions

Introduction
On the big canvas of current conversations, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) takes a hefty role in deciding what would be considered suitable for the narrative of public health. This literature review carefully examines the FDA's stringency when determining the release of certain drinks/foods and medication/drugs to the public. Quality of Life would be determined by the human body's absence of sickness and general wellness of the body, productive workability, lack of any physical addiction, and passive income. As the years go by, new scholarly works, scientific studies, and academic literature are released ultimately leading to the question: Is the United States FDA stringent enough when determining what foods/drugs should be released to the public determining Gen-z and future generations overall quality of life?

Inside the land of contemporary America, the plurality of adolescent and child obesity is on a sneaky yet swift rise. With about seventeen percent of United States children present with Obesity and other health problems that come with it, the surge of obesity provokes a necessary examination of the choices U.S. citizens need to make in their day-to-day diet (Sanyaolu et al, 2019). American portion sizes are often super-sized, contributing to the obesity epidemic. Furthermore, large portions often contain excessive amounts of unhealthy ingredients/additives such as added sugar, trans fat, food dyes, corn syrup, etc. (Livingstone et al, 2014, 2). These weight-related issues can vary between hypertension, cardiovascular disease, type 2 diabetes mellitus, and some cancers. Epidemiological evidence suggests that increased body mass index (BMI) is associated with an increased risk for cancers of the esophagus, pancreas, colon and rectum, endometrium, kidney and breast (in postmenopausal women), among others. (Ross S. A. 2010, 2)

When taking a deeper look into what is being distributed and put into the foods most citizens consume, a trend seems to appear. Corn syrup being located in many processed foods is a key factor in why the United States is having a swift rise in obesity. Having excess amounts of fructose which adds extra calories taken into the body also messes with our feelings of hunger, making people eat more than their bodies should which is also known as overeating (Bray, G. A., Nielsen, S. J., and Popkin, B. M. 2004). Moreover, the excessive intake of products created with corn syrup not only fuels obesity but can develop diseases in the body such as Kidney diseases (Hernando et al, 2023). This is not just limited to high fructose corn syrup, but another sugar substitute named Aspartame. Aspartame is often located in diet-friendly or low-calorie alternatives, yet it has similar effects to corn syrup.

Diving into the FDA's medication approval process reveals potential gaps in stringency and inconsistency. Cannabinoids as an active ingredient in medication and prescriptions may seem promising for relaxation and therapy but have serious health effects linked to the cannabinoid drug. These health effects are oral/neck cancer, oral tissue disease, Periodontal Diseases, Dental Caries, etc (Bellocchio et al, 2021, 10-11). Cannabis abuse has always been known to impact on proper oral health status (Bellocchio et al, 2021, 13). Expanding the study on FDA relaxant drugs beyond cannabinoids it becomes evident that drugs like Alprazolam and Diazepam are not immune to provoking serious health concerns in the body. Alprazolam may increase the risk of serious or life-threatening problems such as breathing problems, sedation, coma, seizures, problems with coordination or balance, problems with speech, and many more (U.S. National Library of Medicine 2021).

The Food and Drug Administration being a pioneer in public health regulations in the United States plays a role in integrating wellness into the nation's trends. The FDA's thoroughness in determining the safety of foods, drugs, and activities has an impact on our quality of life affecting not only the current generation such as Gen-Z, but also future generations. This literature review aims to delve into the complexities of the FDA decision-making processes in assessing how stringent they are in determining what FDA approved prescription drugs and foods should be available to the public. By utilizing both qualitative and quantitative data this analysis strives not to only calculate the effects of FDA decisions on future generations but also to deeply explore the factors that shape these regulatory measures. Using this information I hypothesize that If the FDA continues its path of lack of stringency in its decision-making regarding the quantity control of various products, then there will be a compromise on the future of public health, concerning citizens quality of life being damaged.

Method
For the entire time that this research paper is concerned with, the chosen design is Correlational. This research paper will employ a Correlational design to explore the relationship between variables, with the Dependent variable focusing on the safety/questioning of FDA stringency on approved products and the Independent variable examining the effect these FDA-approved products have on future generation's quality of life, establishing correlations between them.

The Quantitative data will include factors such as percentages/rates of obesity, cancer rates, and health effects based on experiments including both human and animal subjects taken from various scholarly sources. Qualitative data possesses information concerning the FDA's lenient food standards, slow response times to national food emergencies caused by a big company located throughout or in the United States, and drawn upon insights provided by a current expert within the FDA.

In the limits of this research paper, the subjects under study entail both animal test subjects and human patients. Among the former, we find representative samples like laboratory rats, as well as pigs. The methodological framework applied for the study of animal subjects is based on the Random Sampling principles. This technique implies the random selection of animals from the entire population, and their subsequent exposure to specific study factors. The instruments used in the research article are case studies and research articles which were used to get information on certain FDA-approved substances, background information on the FDA as a whole, and the effects certain diseases caused by approved substances have on an individual. One more important component of the research is the conversations with the persons who know the FDA, for instance, people who worked at the FDA for at least a year or the representatives of the major companies that have experienced FDA regulations.

Findings
Having an understanding of the foundational concerns involving the FDA with its stringency and United States citizens quality of life, the focus shifts from a deconstruction of the methodology used when answering the central question, Is the United States FDA sufficiently stringent in its evaluation of foods, drugs, and associated actions for the public's benefit, particularly influencing the overall quality of life for Generation Z and subsequent generations? The availability of staff for this project will be narrowed down to one. This will be an FDA official, with multiple years of experience working with the FDA. There will be no actual experiment conducted by the author of this research paper, therefore the participant pool will be zero as well as the budget for this research paper being frivolity. All the data mentioned in this research paper will have been extracted from outside credible sources as mentioned before.

Regarding the quality of life for future and current generations, cancer rates are increasing exponentially in adolescents. Acute myeloid leukemia increased to 1.73% of women, thyroid cancer increased to 2.12% of women and 1.59% in males, non-Hodgkin lymphoma increased to 2.16% for women; 1.38% for males, and testicular cancer (1.55% males) had the largest yearly incidence increases (Burkhamer et al, 1, 2017). Between the years 1999 through 2016 obesity has increased from 13.9% to 18.5% for children between the age of 2 years old up to 19 years old (Sanyaolu et al, 2, 2019). Between 1961 and 2000, the consumption of HFCS climbed by more than 1000%. Currently, HFCS accounts for 40% of the calorie sweeteners that are added to food and drinks.

Concerning the drugs portion of the Food and Drug Administration they have legalized handling an extensive variety of drugs that turn out to show a considerable deal of side effects to the human body. Looking over at cannabis, this drug is commonly known to be used as a relaxant, but actually causes a concerning amount of health effects such as oral/neck cancer, oral tissue disease, Periodontal Diseases, Dental Caries, dependence on cannabinoid drug, etc (Bellocchio et al, 2021, 10-11). In 2022, the percentage of people who use Cannabis on a daily basis reached its greatest point at 11%. This was higher than the percentages from six years prior (8% in 2018) and 12 years prior (6% in 2012) (NIDA. 2023, August 17).

Now considering FDA approved Opioid Drugs it seems the drugs enable users to be highly prone to addiction, and accidental overdose. More specifically fentanyl. During a test with 64 individuals living in Massachusetts who witnessed/experienced an overdose, 75% took/witnessed/gave the administration of naloxone and 83% reported needing 2 or more naloxone doses. Fentanyl was the primary illicit opioid in the state of Massachusetts (Armenian et al, 2018, 9). Male fentanyl overdose deaths increased by a staggering 1.634% and female overdose deaths by 1.726% between 2016 and 2022 (Barbara et al, 2023, 9).

Another FDA-approved drug that is often used to bring relief from anxiety, insomnia, and muscle spasms is benzodiazepines. Users of long half-life BZDs had a 60% increased risk of developing dementia, a 20% increase in the risk of ischemic stroke in AD patients using BZDs and Z-drugs. Studies also show the extended use of BZDs was a significant risk factor for the cognitive decline in the elderly (Ettcheto et al, 2020, 8-10).

Discussions
The data given demonstrates a frightening trend of health management status deterioration among children and adolescents, in which there is a seen increase in cancer rates and obesity prevalence. One would agree that the giant increase in the use of high-fructose corn syrup (HFCS) unarguably poses a serious health risk posed by the growing obesity rates. HFCS, which makes up 40% of the sweetener load that is added to food and drinks, has been consumed in steadily rising amounts in the period from 1967 to the year 2000.

Conclusion
In scrutinizing the FDA's stringency concerning food, drugs, and public actions, alarming trends emerge that highlight significant shortcomings in safeguarding the quality of life for present and future generations. The increase of additives like high fructose corn syrup and the escalation of adolescent obesity underscores the urgent need for enhanced oversight. Additionally, the addictive nature and adverse side effects of FDA-approved drugs pose profound risks to public health. It is unacceptable that the FDA has allowed the prevalence of harmful substances like high fructose corn syrup and addictive drugs to increase unchecked, despite the overwhelming evidence of their detrimental effects on public health.

According to Mr. Thompson from the National Library of Medicine, The FDA has been chronically underfunded in carrying out its responsibilities for ensuring the safety of drugs, medical devices, and the nation's food supply (Institute of Medicine, 2007). With the support of American citizens who care passionately about their and the future generation's health, the FDA can receive more funding from both the government and concerned citizens. This proper funding from both government and concerned citizens whether it's from an Advocacy Campaign, a Riot, Partnerships with pharmaceutical companies or food manufacturers Industry, or even the reaching out to congressional representatives and senators to express support for legislation that provides enough funding to the FDA. Getting involved in lobbying efforts and emphasizing the importance of FDA funding in safeguarding public health and advancing healthcare innovation. The FDA will be able to do so much more than what they can do now, the FDA will have enhanced safety measures, a faster, more accurate, and stricter approval process, and the expansion of research initiatives.

References
Amaram-Davila, J., Davis, M. and Reddy, A. Opioids and Cancer Mortality. Curr. Treat. Options in Oncol. 21, 22 (2020).
Andres-Hernando, A. et al. (2023). High Fructose Corn Syrup Accelerates Kidney Disease and Mortality in Obese Mice. Biomolecules.
Armenian, P., et al. (2018). Fentanyl, fentanyl analogs and novel synthetic opioids. Neuropharmacology.
Bellocchio, L., et al. (2021). Cannabinoids Drugs and Oral Health. International Journal of Molecular Sciences.
Bray, G. A., Nielsen, S. J., and Popkin, B. M. (2004). Consumption of high-fructose corn syrup in beverages. The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition.
Ettcheto, M., et al. (2020). Benzodiazepines and Related Drugs as a Risk Factor in Alzheimer's Disease Dementia. Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience.
Institute of Medicine (US) Forum on Drug Discovery. (1970). Addressing the FDA's resource challenges.
Kobylewski, S., and Jacobson, M. F. (2012). Toxicology of food dyes. International Journal of Occupational and Environmental Health.
Livingstone, M. B. E., and Pourshahidi, L. K. (2014). Portion Size and Obesity. Advances in Nutrition.
NIDA. 2023, August 17. Marijuana and hallucinogen use. Retrieved from nida.nih.gov.
Sanyaolu, A., et al. (2019). Childhood and Adolescent Obesity in the United States. Global Pediatric Health.
Yang, F., et al. (2023). Patterns of toxicity burden for FDA-approved immune checkpoint inhibitors. Journal of Experimental and Clinical Cancer Research.