
Within society, it is understood that finding the source of the crime is the only way to figure out how to lessen its occurrence. Knowing why people act on robbery and assaults helps prevent more victims while also helping people before they act on these crimes. To stop something before it occurs is what makes a modern day society livable and progressive. The problem that this research paper will be going over is acts of cannibalism. Something that is not often talked about or thought of but a strong and prominent problem nonetheless. This research question will consider the main three motivations of cannibalism and why it happens, in hopes of understanding why it still happens in the modern day.

Despite the arguments that have been made regarding the ethics when it comes to consensual cannibalism practice. This research article will focus on crime as a whole regardless of the morality question. The idea that cannibalism can be ideal, romanticized, or just thought of in a good light should be questioned. Mental health is very often overlooked, especially when it is as dark as committing such extreme and grotesque acts.

When committing the act of cannibalism, for the most part, it takes a lot of emotion and planning. Even those who don't plan on acting on it know that it is very hard to learn about recipes and other information needed when it comes to this crime. Mad Cow Disease or BSE is a disease that damages a cow's brain and spinal cord and this is very dangerous for both cows and humans. As of 2019, 232 people worldwide are known to have become sick with vCJD, and unfortunately, they have died. (All About BSE, 2020) vCJD is Mad Cow Disease but when a person catches it. There is no cure or treatment, and everyone has died once catching this disease. That is extremely dangerous and scientists are not treating this matter seriously enough.

What is known are three main motives when it comes to cannibalism which is nutritional, ritual, and pathological. Nutritional is when a person cannibalizes another for the sake of survival or for the caloric content. Ritual is when cannibalism is a part of a cultural practice which causes cannibalism to be normalized. And the final motive is pathological, where the cause for a person to cannibalize another is rooted within their psychopathology. This means that it was caused by a disorder or mental illness, the problem is that due to the lack of care and research scientists have no clear understanding of what mental illness or disorder causes this. A controversial yet medically recognized disorder is the wendigo psychosis which might be a step in the right direction if looked at further. The symptoms of this psychosis are anxiety, paranoia, hallucinations, and cannibalistic urges.

Common assumptions for why people get this psychosis is their upbringing, environment, substance abuse, and even antisocial traits. However these assumptions are not satisfactory given the fact that these are all not clear answers to what brings a person to act on cannibalism. Since many people who have traumatic experiences and experiences with abuse, drug consumption, and lack of socializing haven't thought of or acted on cannibalism. These things listed are, if anything, rather common which does not reflect the uncommon occurrence of cannibalism.

An instance of cannibalism that fits the nutritional motive is instances of corpse medicine. This practice was at its peak in the 16th and 17th century, with it only dying off in the 20th century. This practice was using the human body through consumption or application in the hopes of healing another person. In the past it was believed that drinking another person's blood would give you the strength and power from said person. Corpse medicine was done by healers, priests, and royalty, it was something that was truly believed to work.

An example of cannibalism being used through the ritual motive is from Beth A. Conklin who is a cultural and medical anthropologist at Vanderbilt University. He states that Cannibalism was seen as sacred and often used as a ritual, which ties into how cannibalism in a way is normalized through culture and religions. This sacred ritual was frequently used to mourn and reintegrate the deceased into the tribe. This being brought up was a form of defense when tribes using cannibalism was often used to demonize them and a justification of racism.

Corpse medicine is still something that is done to this day, it is only done in more ethical ways. Organ transplants, blood transfusion, skin grafts, and so on all count, however the reasons for doing these things are not science based on belief but based on fact.

The lack of research on cannibalism makes it difficult to write research on due to the fact there is not a lot to work with. Especially when most research done on cannibalism was done with ill intent or with outdated beliefs and information.

The Methods used were both quantitative and qualitative with surveys conducted along with experiments. One of the surveys that were done was a combination of surveys that came up with the percentage of how common cannibalism is when it comes to reported homicides. Out of 26,031 reported homicides, the 105 reported cases of cannibalism causes cannibalism to be 0.004%. This is only considering the past few centuries which still makes these statistics shocking and low enough to justify for some to consider cannibalism to be a non issue. The survey done to showcase the amount of reported homicides is from the National Center for Health Statistics. What gave the statistic of 0.004% is the given fact that the reported cases of cannibalism is 105 cases in the past 50 years (Victor G. Petreca, 2021). Something to consider is that 52.6% of violent crimes that result in injury go unreported, which is from a survey conducted by the US Department of Justice (Daniel T.Wu, 2020).

Another method used to develop this research was an experiment, the Damselfly Larvae Experiment. This was an experiment done to see how the larvae would behave if it were to be born with chemical cues influenced by cannibalism. The experiment was to test if the larvae would act more aggressive and more predatory, cannibalistic. Or to see if the larvae would be more timid and anxious as if it was the prey. When the experiment was set up and done it showed that the larvae hid rather than eat the food provided. This shows that instead of being more aggressive it showed that it was now unnaturally more timid. (Monika Sysiak, 2023)

The lack of research on cannibalism makes it difficult to write research on due to the fact there is not a lot to work with. However putting all of this research together, it makes it clearer that cannibalism is a lot more complex than just eating your own kind. It says a lot about what someone is willing to do for their sake of survival and beliefs, along with the possibility of mental illness and disorder. Down to the three different motives, and the aftermath effects of acting on cannibalism. All of the research provided brings light to an urgency to something that hasn't been considered urgent before. It shows that cannibalism is worthy of being researched further and looked more into.

Oldak, S. E., Maristany, A., and Brianna, C. (2023). Wendigo Psychosis and Psychiatric Perspectives of Cannibalism. Cureus.
Sysiak, M., Pietrzak, B., Kubiak, M., Bednarska, A., and Mikulski, A. (2023). Chemical cannibalistic cues make damselfly larvae hide rather than hunt. Scientific Reports.
Institution, S. Humans evolutionary relatives butchered one another 1.45 million. Smithsonian Institution.
Wendigo Psychosis and Psychiatric Perspectives of Cannibalism. PubMed, 30 October 2023.
Kin-Avoidance in Cannibalistic Homicide. Frontiers, 31 August 2020.
Taub, Benjamin, and Carlotta Varriale. How Wendigo Psychosis Turns People Into Cannibals. IFLScience.
Lindenbaum, Shirley. Cannibalism. Cambridge Encyclopedia of Anthropology.
Mad Cow Disease. Johns Hopkins Medicine.
FastStats Homicide. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
All About BSE Mad Cow Disease. FDA, 23 July 2020.
Dolan, Maria. The Gruesome History of Eating Corpses as Medicine. Smithsonian Magazine.
Dominique, Paul, and Erin Blakemore. The gory history of Europe's mummy-eating fad. National Geographic.
Lovejoy, Bess. A Brief History of Medical Cannibalism. Lapham's Quarterly.