
Evaluating Treatments To Aid In Ameliorating Adolescents With Hutchinson-Gilford Progeria Syndrome Meta Analysis
April 30 2024
Word Count: 4,107

Introduction
Hutchinson-Gilford Progeria Syndrome (HGPS) is a premature aging condition that is a rare and fatal syndrome caused by a genetic mutation, from the buildup of progerin lamin A mutant protein creating Hutchinson-Gilford Progeria Syndrome. The Zokinvy drug (Lonafarnib) is a farnesyltransferase inhibitor whose goal is to prevent the accumulation of farnesylated progerin and progerin like proteins in the nucleus of cells. The Lonafarnib drug is used to aid in ameliorating and reducing the proportional risk of causing death in adolescents with Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome and is currently the only FDA approved drug used to treat the syndrome. Several treatments, therapeutics and current clinical trials will be analyzed in this research to aid in ameliorating the premature aging condition. Including CRISPR/Cas9-based therapies both mouse models, as well as Traditional Gene Editing (Adenine Gene Base Editing). This research will analyze the effectiveness of the Lonafarnib drug as well as expose and compare what is next for aiding to find a cure for Hutchinson-Gilford Progeria syndrome. As a target of three major main treatments and therapeutics. Exploring the possibilities and through qualitative meta-analysis to aid in exposing the new research that can possibly be more effective than the Lonafarnib drug alone, as well as expanding the life spans of the adolescents with Hutchinson-Gilford Progeria Syndrome.

Lit Review/Background
Hutchinson-Gilford Progeria syndrome was discovered in 1866 by Dr. Jonathan Hutchinson and again in 1904 by Dr. Hasting Gilford. As of 2024, there is still no cure for the critical premature aging disorder. Hutchinson-Gilford Progeria Syndrome (HGPS) is an autosomal dominant inheritance caused by a genetic mutation from the build-up of progerin lamin A mutant protein. A genetic test for LMNA Mutation can confirm the diagnosis of Progeria. The mutation causes a defective protein called progerin. Progerin makes the cells unstable and causes rapid aging. 1 in 4 million children world-wide are affected with progeria. The LMNA Gene is found as it lines the inner nuclear embrace sea-flooding, being found in the neoplasm. Its job is to bind the chromatin to effect the transcription, it is expressed through different cell types. (Ostland and Woman 2003, p. 393) This causes an abnormal protein labeled as Progerin to be formed. The role of the progerin alters nuclear architecture, as well as release heterochromatin from the nuclear periphery, changes epigenetic regulation, signaling and gene expression, disrupts telomeres, causing genome instability, which leads to premature senescence. Gonzalo (2015)

Symptoms
The Common Cleveland Clinic (2022) expressed the following on physical symptoms and appearance expressed in Hutchinson-Gilford Progeria Syndrome: Children are characterized with a small face in comparison to the head; with an underdeveloped jaw (micrognathia); containing crowding of the teeth; small and prominent eyes with various wrinkles; narrow and small nose; and a subtle blueness around the mouth. (p.12) Adolescents with Hutchinson-Gilford Progeria Syndrome have an average life expectancy of ages in their teenage years (Age 14-17), some living up to early 20s. The most common cause of death is due to heart complications including artheosclerosis, stroke, blood flow complications.

Research Question
Which treatments are most effective in life expectancy expansion and aid higher quality of life to reverse and ameliorate Hutchinson-Gilford Progeria Syndrome?

Gap In Research
Pre-existing research emphasizes the still little to know about the rare condition. The purpose of this research is to aid in finding a vital cure, as well as evaluate the effectiveness in expansion of quality of life in adolescents. In elaboration of the limitations of no-lab access, lack of education and experience for high level research, for this fatal condition through synthesizing and evaluating procedures and collecting personal data through others to evaluate the effectiveness as well as exposing the new and possible treatments that can possibly be more effective than the Lonafarnib drug. The goal of this secondary study is to synthesize research from recent studies to evaluate different treatments to aid in ameliorating children with Hutchinson Gifford syndrome. Throughout my research containing the main priorities when evaluating: One, analyze if the treatments and clinical trials interfered with an expansion in life expectancy or interfered causing rapid premature death. Second, how will the treatments affect adolescents in the long-term, if the drug is causing a reduction in progerin, and will the symptoms reverse?

Methods
This research will synthesize a rigorous approach using the mix of Case Study research methods as well as Meta-Analysis to explore diverse findings from various perspectives. The Case Study research method will be used to help set an in-depth examination of Hutchinson-Gilford Progeria Syndrome as well as set a Qualitative design standard on what the research sets to explore and evaluate. The Meta-Analysis research method will be used through a combination of comparing the various studies, allowing exploration of the treatment's effects in an inclusive and generalizable perspective. The use of meta-analysis in the treatment throughout my research will aid in the contribution in the understanding of efficiency, and effectiveness in the treatment outcomes of the research, as well as the therapeutic interventions. By creating graphs as well as my own data through success rates and percentages this research will express the range in a set variety of treatments and express the effectiveness through their long-term, and short term, effects as well as the consistency. Due to the fatal conditions rapid-age growth the life expectancy ranges from ages 14-17. The treatments from Lonafarnib (Zokinvy) are distributed as a farnesyltransferase inhibitor that targets the main protein. Every patient analyzed through treatments will be examined on their symptoms, severity ranging from mild to severe as well as their life expectancy with and without treatment. For the analysis of the outcome of the FDA approved Lonafarnib this research will demonstrate this through creating graphs in correlation to the long-term outcomes and increased quality of life to the treatment as well as the difference to the adolescents who did not receive the Lonafarnib treatment. The data will be extracted mainly from sources connected to the Progeria Research Foundation on their lead research from researchers such as Dr. Leslie Gordon, Justine Maestranzi (Clinical Trial Coordinator) as well as other various researchers basing off their discoveries to aid in ameliorating the fatal condition. Qualitative data including meta-analysis as well as statistical data were used to analyze the effects from each treatment as well as the outcomes in the patients.

Limitations
Due to the complexity and in-access to the amount of research and lab work, much of this research was heavily reliant on the work of other aspiring researchers and scientists (all credited throughout case study and work cited). The limitation of the rarity of the condition and the amount of patients and tested trials on case studies set boundaries on accessing other clinical trials. Two of the Three treatments are on-going clinical trials sponsored through the Progeria Research Foundation, with a lack of information in comparison from patient to mice. Throughout this meta-analysis research there were complications in lack of data in the patients today for the Lonafarnib (Zokinvy) treatments and in finding more treatments to analyze and collect statistical data from due to the lack of clinical studies and on-going trials with heavy research on it and the amount of times it has been tested.

Implications
The Line Graphs in Figures 3 and 4 are based on Body-Weight Progression in correlation with the gap questionnaire to aim in reversing the progeria symptoms to make the LMNA gene healthier. Containing a X-Axis of Age in Weeks the mice lived in correlation to a Y-Axis with their Percent Survival rates to the weeks. The bar graph in Figure 2 is based on the Lonafarnib studies through Dr. Leslie Gordon from the Progeria Research Foundation on the percentages of Mortality rates and their correlation if cause of death was due to heart conditions with age linkage.

Data
Zokinvy (Lonafarnib) is a farnesyltransferase inhibitor which prevents the accumulation of farnesylated progerin and progerin like proteins in the nucleus of cells. The Lonafarnib drug is used to aid in ameliorating and reducing the proportional risk of causing death in adolescents with Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome and is currently the only FDA approved drug to treat the syndrome. Zokinvy, a farnesyltransferase inhibitor, is an oral medication used to prevent buildup of the defective progerin protein. Throughout this research and testing the accuracy of the FDA approved Zokinvy (Lonafarnib) drug and its effectiveness. Clinical trials have demonstrated that Lonafarnib, a farnesyltransferase inhibitor, extends the lifespan in patients afflicted by Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome, a devastating condition that accelerates many characteristics of aging and results in premature death due to cardiovascular sequelae (Murtada SI.1). HGPS had a mean survival time of 8 years, with an increased mean survival time of 2.5 years in comparison with the untreated patients with HGPS. For the treated patients with HGPS, the estimated survival probability was 79% at 5 years and 44% at 10 years. In contrast, for the untreated patients with HGPS, the estimated survival probability was 57% at 5 years and 17% at 10 years. Mary (2023) The Lonafarnib treatment showed a significant increase in survival rate with treatment in comparison to over non-treatment in over 35%. Including the mortality rate with an exception of death due to heart failure with over a 15% difference in success.

CRISPR/Cas9-based gene editing
The CRISPR/Cas9-based strategy was developed to be used against HGPS as an aim at blocking the over-production of lamin A and progerin. CRISPR/Cas9 is a new source of engineered technology that allows researchers to edit the genome. Santiago (2019)

Adenine Gene Editing
The Adenine Gene Editing therapeutic methods goal is to be able to successfully reverse the primary genetic defect in HGPS, eliminating the production of the pathogenic progerin protein while preserving the normal lamin A protein. Adenine Gene editing showing higher results and complications similar to CRISPR/Cas9-based therapeutics. The Adenine base editor is held higher due to it making very minor changes to existing DNA without cutting or adding unintended damage to the gene. Musunuru (2021)

Results and Analysis
Several of the CRISPR/Cas9-based gene editings have shown massive improvement in mean mortality to up to 83%. The mouse fibroblasts were observed with different indels in the DNA. A decrease in progerin and lamin A by Western blot an 83% decrease in progerin-positive nuclei and a 39% reduction in the number of aberrant nuclei. There is a reduction in the total amount of progerin. The treated transduced mice was modified and shown into an increase in their median survival of 33.5 days, from 127 to 160.5 days, compared to the control-transduced cohort, which represents a 26.4% lifespan increase. Mean survival was extended from 128.1 days. The maximum survival was extended from 151 to 212 days. (Santiago P.12)

In comparison through clinical trials my studies have shown through mice that the Adenine gene editing mice showed higher mortality in weeks in comparison to non-treated. The studies showed that the Mice that were treated with HGPS had successfully completed the rescue of the phenotypes, resembling wild-type mice. The study shown as most sufficient in my recent due to the improvement of the HGPS mice having a maximized life expectancy of up to 2.4 times as long as the control HGPS mice an extension of lifespan surpassing other treatment modalities, speaking to the utility of direct correction of the primary genetic defect in HGPS. (section 14)

Transient adenine base editor expression corrected the mutation in 20.8-24.1% of the skin cells. Through my observation and prior knowledge my research has shown the goal and result of the Adenine Gene base editor to be the most successful, giving the mice a close to wild-life resemblance with a massive increase in its life span. The downside of the Adenine Gene Editing trial was that over 65% of the mice were found to have liver tumors though the complications are found otherwise than the gene editor.

Future Studies
In conclusion, in future research conducted limitations would be exceeded with new information gathered on what is yet to be found and discovered on progeria. My studies show that the Adenine gene based editor would be most effective and beneficial towards aiding in ameliorating completely HGPS. With the lower-risk of damaging the DNA and getting a precise edit, while having the opportunity to fully reverse the condition at its full potential in comparison to Lonafarnib and CRISPR/Cas9 with higher risk/complications and not the full effect and potential to ameliorate the condition. Towards the future implications, this will be taken into my future on learning more on the fascination of Hutchinson-Gilford Progeria syndrome and the urgency to find a cure for it. Aiming now as of March 31, 2024 there are several other trials and exposures for HGPS. Including a new way to measure the progerin levels in patients using blood plasma in order to measure progerin levels. This will aid researchers to examine clinical trial results in a shorter period of time.

Work Cited
Abutaleb, N. O. et al. (2023). Lonafarnib and everolimus reduce pathology in iPSC-derived tissue engineered blood vessel model of Hutchinson-Gilford Progeria Syndrome. Scientific Reports.
Cabral, W. A. et al. (2021). Genetic reduction of mTOR extends lifespan in a mouse model of Hutchinson-Gilford Progeria syndrome. Aging Cell.
Dhillon S. (2021). Lonafarnib: First Approval. Drugs.
Gonzalo, S., and Kreienkamp, R. (2015). DNA repair defects and genome instability in Hutchinson-Gilford Progeria Syndrome. Current opinion in cell biology.
Gordon, L. B. et al. (2012). Clinical trial of a farnesyltransferase inhibitor in children with Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome. PNAS.
Gordon, L. B. et al. (2023). Plasma Progerin in Patients With Hutchinson-Gilford Progeria Syndrome. Circulation.
Musunuru K. (2021). Adenine base editing to treat progeria syndrome and extend the lifespan. The journal of cardiovascular aging.
Santiago-Fernandez, O. et al. (2019). Development of a CRISPR/Cas9-based therapy for Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome. Nature medicine.
Sagelius, H. et al. (2008). Reversible phenotype in a mouse model of Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome. Journal of medical genetics.
Suzuki, M. et al. (2023). FDA approval summary for lonafarnib (Zokinvy). Genetics in Medicine.
Vidak, S., and Foisner, R. (2016). Molecular insights into the premature aging disease progeria. Histochemistry and Cell Biology.
Worman, H. J., and Michaelis, S. (2023). Prelamin A and ZMPSTE24 in premature and physiological aging. Nucleus.