
Mahendra Ghaness
AP Research
Innovation High School
Joseph Fasani
April 29, 2024
Running Head: HOMESCHOOL IS THE BEST OPTION FOR EDUCATION

Introduction
The education system is transcending into a slippery slope of corruption that attacks the future of our society. The skills learned and created for an industrial age have been enforced in our educational system, furthermore amplified by technological advancements that have been highly misused. The only viable solution that will unite families and increase the future success of our children is homeschooling. First, above all else we have to clarify what homeschool is; The predominant definition is the parent of the child will have access to a fully innovative self made curriculum that best fits the morals and values they want to instill into their children. In modern day, the addition of technologies such as the smart phone which introduced social media has heavily influenced the psychological behavior of many children leading to bad physical and mental health. Homeschool is a great alternative to ensure a safe and successful future for our children. This leads to the focus of this paper; What divergent incentives lead to parents choosing the homeschooling route instead of the traditional education route for highschool, and middle school students in the twenty-first century?

Environment of a Public School System
Stemming from peer pressure, religion, forced values and morals, bullying, etc, all affect our children. These are only a few of the many factors that contribute to making a public highschool environment dangerous for our children. In 2022, Approximately 3.08 million people have been reported to currently use tobacco products and of those 3.08 million people, 2.51 million are highschool students, and 530,000 are middle school students (Eunice Park-Lee, et al, 1,429). A pilot program was carried out by the Oncology Nursing Society to reach out to children in public education systems on the effects and prevention of tobacco usage. The program was a success, the children of this program felt safe with the support of a certified and credible physician to clarify just how bad the ingestion of these chemical products can be (Martha Lassiter, et al, 29). Homeschooling your child will prevent the sight of them on a hospital bed awaiting a diagnosis or possible cure for the amount of toxic chemicals they were pressured to intake.

Mental and Physical Health of children
Jesse Thomas who wrote the journal article titled, Perspectives of Homeschoolers Motivated by Religious and Moral Reasons claims, The number of homeschooling families continues to increase in the United States (Bielick, 2008; Watson, 2018), and Ray (2011) estimated more than 2,000,000 homeschooled students in 2010. (21). In the journal article, Cardiovascular Health and Physical Activity Levels in Homeschooled Children written by David A. Wachob, was a study performed through the SenseWear Mini accelerometer, which is a device that records the functionality of your heart through vigorous or normal exercise. The data presented showed that the children who are homeschooled lose around twelve hundred calories a day (average for both genders), which is a substantial amount for physical exercise. The data presented proved that boys between the ages of 13-16 experience more vigorous physical exercise than that of girls in the same age group (David A. Wachob, 403). This study proves that children of a homeschooled environment do achieve a substantial amount of physical activity.

Value of education
Along with the environment, mental and physical health, the overall value of education also gets questioned when parents decide to enroll their children into a homeschool education. A study performed by the authors of Homeschooling: What do we know and what do we need to learn? provide substantial evidence that parents choose to homeschool their children because they feel they are better fit and equipped to instill their own beliefs and values into their children (Carlos Valiente, et al, 49). In the informational article, Schools and emotional and behavioral problems: A comparison of school-going and homeschooled children the authors Oz Guterman, and Ari Neuman claim that the pedagogy in the western world is identical to that of a world of industrial revolution (Oz Guterman and Ari Neuman, 425). Author Augustina S. Paglayan theorizes in a journal article titled, Education or Indoctrination? The Violent Origins of Public School Systems in an Era of State-Building, that the political and governmental elites have instilled the moral values and behaviors of obedience, discipline, and respect for authority that will prohibit mass terror, or rebellion against a world order (1242). These are all tangible results we can see in real time, children going to school to get assignments done, and to get good grades on exams instead of learning information that is actually beneficial to their futures.

Gap
The gap in this research topic are the main reasons that lead parents to evade traditional schooling. This paper attempts to target the major inclusions that lead parents to homeschool their children. The method of this research paper is qualitative data collection and analysis. My hypothesis is that the current education system is not built for the high tech civilization we live in today. Through this research paper, assumptions can be made that the current education system is built for an industrial age of developmental societal growth.

Method
The approach to this research paper is to identify an inquiry worth researching. The best problem to attack head on would be the education system. The future of our civilization lies in the hands of our youth. If children aren't learning what needs to be learned in order for our world to function, how can we as humans thrive. The current public education system was made for an industrial age of revolutionary technology. The high-tech civilization we all live in now, needs a better fitting education system that teaches skills that apply to the new world. The homeschool education system better fits the high-tech civilization we live in because it builds a better environment for children to thrive in. The physical and mental health of children will be better, and the value of education would be staggeringly higher than that of a public education system.

This research paper will strictly be a qualitative study, although some data and a mini opinionated survey may be done to achieve results. The entire education system has been sought out to be fraudulent, so tackling this research inquiry with qualitative data would be much easier than completing it with quantitative. A survey that targets the teachers in the education system, parents of the students that are schooled in these education systems, and last but definitely not least the children that are schooled in these educational systems. The goal of this survey is to tackle the different perspectives and perceptions on the educational system, to hear the stories, to actually listen to what our parents and children want in their education. If the survey does reach the audience of homeschooled children and parents, then this study will also provide insight on the benefits, and/or pros and cons of the homeschooled education system.

Data
The population of homeschooling had shown a diminution in size before the age of a new disease that revolutionized the way parents perceive education for their children. In early 2016, the population of homeschooling was 2.3 million in the U.S. 2017, 2.356 million. 2018 2.4 million. 2019, 2.5 million. 2020 2.6 million. At the height of this chart in the year 2021, the population lies at 3.751 million.

To understand why families are deciding to convert to this method of education, We must first question, And understand, What different factors steer parents to this way of teaching their children. In the early 1800s, education was something new to civilization, the use for education didn't become a necessity until the Civil War of 1861. America wanted children to grow up and became obedient soldiers similar to the popular civilization of Prussia, so the education system was built to indoctrinate children. (Agustina S. Paglayan, 1243). In the current day and age the public education system remains the same institution that was built to create warriors and soldiers, not for the goal of making the future of our society financially successful.

The data of Figure D, the National Center for Education Statistics accumulated accurate numbers to show the annual earnings of people with different educational levels in a traditional education system. Although there is no data on the annual earnings of people who were homeschooled, the average earnings of a person who was homeschooled up to 12 grade is $67,000 per year.

Conclusion
The education system has transcended into a slippery slope of time that is wasted on teaching children to be obedient employees and nothing more. The environment of both education models are very different. The public education environment leads to peer pressure, religious conflicts, forced values and morals, bullying, etc. With tobacco being the leading problem in the public education system, with 3.08 million students either using or abusing marijuana (Eunice Park-Lee, et al, 1,429). This problem of tobacco abusage is only growing, and the homeschool education system is the best way to stop the problem. All in all, through these three perspectives we can analyze the current education system and come to the realization that it does not fit our current high-tech civilization. Homeschooling children is a better option for the growth of our children and to help them succeed in every paradigm of life, which in the long run will make our society many more steps closer to a utopia.

References
Barone Kolenc, A. (2016). Homeschooling and the Perils of Shared Parental Responsibility. Florida Bar Journal.
Dwyer, R. E., McCloud, L., and Hodson, R. (2012). Debt and Graduation from American Universities. Social Forces.
Eunice Park-Lee, et al. (2022). Tobacco Product Use Among Middle and High School Students. MMWR.
Guterman, O., and Neuman, A. (2017). Schools and emotional and behavioral problems. Journal of Educational Research.
Hodge, D. R., Salas-Wright, C. P., and Vaughn, M. G. (2017). Behavioral Risk Profiles of Homeschooled Adolescents. Substance Use and Misuse.
Knopf, A. (2015). Teach Your Children to Be Informed Consumers. Brown University Child and Adolescent Behavior Letter.
Lassiter, M., Bruce, S., and Weinstein Dunn, M. (2022). E-Cigarettes and Middle School Education. Oncology Nursing Forum.
Murphy, J. (2014). The Social and Educational Outcomes of Homeschooling. Sociological Spectrum.
Thomas, J. (2019). Perspectives of Homeschoolers Motivated by Religious and Moral Reasons. Journal of Research on Christian Education.
Valiente, C. et al. (2022). Homeschooling: What do we know and what do we need to learn? Child Development Perspectives.
Wachob, D. A. (2015). Cardiovascular Health and Physical Activity Levels in Homeschooled Children. Health Behavior and Policy Review.
Wearne, E. (2019). Parent and Administrator Perceptions of Hybrid Homeschools. Catholic Social Science Review.