
Zena Patel
AP Research
Mr. Joseph Fasani
Innovation High School
April 28, 2024
Word Count: 5017
A Case study: Surgical vs Therapeutic Treatments of Harlequin Ichthyosis

Definitions:
1. Harlequin Ichthyosis - a genetic disorder that troubles to skin, making it dry and chapped
2. Retinoids - a serum used in dermatological conditions
3. Ceramides - lipids also known as fatty acids to help moisturize the skin barrier
4. ABCA12 Gene - making protein as a transporter to the molecules
5. Skin Barrier - protection for the skin from infections, diseases, threats, etc

ABSTRACT
The purpose of this research paper is to understand the comparison of the only two treatments of one of the rarest diseases which is HI (Harlequin Ichthyosis). HI is the type of disease that occurs from birth to 25 months old. The goal is to find which treatment is more suitable, safer, and less riskier for infants to proceed with when having HI. In this research paper, in order for this goal to be achieved, three qualitative analyses were created based on the treatments of HI's long term outcomes. First qualitative analysis are the mortality rates of HI, from therapeutic and surgical perspectives. Second qualitative analysis are the patient satisfaction rates of HI, from therapeutic and surgical perspectives. Third qualitative analysis are the clinical outcome rates of HI, from therapeutic and surgical perspectives.

LITERATURE REVIEW
Harlequin Ichthyosis
Harlequin Ichthyosis is an extremely rare and harmful disease, especially for newborns. It is a rare genetic disorder that causes thick, dry, and peeling skin. According to (Tsivilika et al, 2022), HI is the most severe form of autosomal recessive disorder known as ichthyosis. It is caused by mutations in the A12 cassette specific morphological characteristics. The gene that mostly underlies this disease is ABCA12 which is part of a group, a family, the Severe Congenital Skin Disease. As stated by (Shrestha et al, 2022), As the skin barrier is severely compromised, there is an excessive water loss and electrolyte abnormalities followed by temperature dysregulation and increase risk of infection.

Surgical Treatment
Many studies indicate positive and negative outcomes of surgical procedures of typical rare diseases such as Harlequin Ichthyosis. Surgical procedures include skin grafting that most of the time damages the newborn's skin but brings in new tissue and can bring in a secured relief. There are always multiple difficulties in surgical procedures which include failure and for the treatment to be repeated every month. According to (Tsivilika et al, 2012), The facial features include eclabium, ectropion, a distinct flattened nose, and dysplastic ears; emphasis is given to surgical management and consultation, to the indications for timing and surgical invention, to the risks presented with surgery. Risks come along with every procedure and since this procedure is most of the time conducted on infants, it is double the risk.

Therapeutic Treatment
Keeping in mind surgical treatments, therapeutic treatments have constant skincare routines in the morning and nights, only twice a day. Furthermore, therapeutic treatments include retinoids, ceramides, and moisturizing for an infant's skin to be healthy and safer from any dangers. According to (Traupe et al 2020), The mortality rate in newborns with HI is very high. Some babies already die in utero. Apart from intensive care, treatment with acitretin may be considered. However, therapeutic procedures take time to recover the pain but they are mostly effective and known for long-term outcome methods for treating Harlequin Ichthyosis. According to (Rajpopat et. al 2011), Recessive mutations in the gene encoding the adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-binding cassette (ABC) transporter protein ABCA12 (NCBI Entrez Gene), localized to the lamellar granules of upper epidermal keratinocytes, cause HI.

Symptoms
HI has certain symptoms which is detected after birth as starting:
Very thin hair on the scalp
Skin becomes thickened on the fingers and toes
Not enough movement or flexibility to stretch, move around, etc
Multiple skin infections combined into one
Difficulty in breathing
Body temperature becomes low
Not having the ability to sweat

According to (Traupe et. al. 2020), distinction is made between common hereditary ichthyoses (IV and XLI), which usually manifest themselves within the first year of life, and rare, sometimes severe congenital ichthyosis, including ARCI.

GAP IN THE BODY OF KNOWLEDGE
In this single case study, the review contributes to the knowledge of Harlequin Ichthyosis, by restoring a well-developed examination on surgical and therapeutic treatments through synthesizing data. Using a specific emphasis on long-term outcomes, the aim is drawn towards a guide of decision-making in improved patient outcomes. There are three main gaps that have been particularly identified after analyzing the body of knowledge:
1. The first gap that has been recognized is because of the rareness of this disease, there are not many treatment options besides therapeutic and surgical for patients to survive within. If there were options given, the mortality rates would not be high.
2. The second gap that has been recognized is this disease is based on their mortality rates since board certified dermatology surgeons have some knowledge towards the needs of the patient. Their patient satisfaction is what matters when undergoing the treatment.
3. The third gap that has been recognized is how closely this disease can be detectable since it cannot be done within or through an ultrasound.

ASSUMPTIONS
One assumption that was determined as well maintained to be true in this research paper is for therapeutic procedures such as retinoids, ceramides, and moisturizing intended to have better long term outcomes as well deeper effectiveness.

QUESTION
How do surgical treatments such as skin grafting and reconstruction compare to therapeutic treatments such as moisturizing, retinoids, and ceramides in terms of their long-term outcomes for individuals with Harlequin Ichthyosis?

METHOD
This review approaches with a literature perspective, analyzing the studies of the two treatments, surgical and therapeutic of Harlequin Ichthyosis on their long-term outcomes. For surgical and therapeutic interventions, it allows a deep understanding of the deep effectiveness of both procedures. Synthesizing data and analysis put their aims in meaningful context, identifying creative patterns in case studies. The plan for this research paper is to gather and collect data from other sources to create specific data to see which one is more effective and safer for an infant to go through. From various articles and sources, certain data created percentages that specifically include the ABCA12 gene with the surgical and therapeutic treatments. By creating figures, the data can determine and synthesize which treatment expects to have a long-term outcome. The subjects connect to the research question because this disease either comes from family history or the next generation. Collecting and gathering data from other sources to create data to see which treatment is more effective and safer for an infant is the plan of figures. To use sheets to create percentages on line graphs so it will show the effectiveness of each treatment. Both procedures are completely different from each other because the way for this procedure is done with precaution with any infant. As said before, every infant has a completely different skin, from face to body to feet. Most infants go through the therapeutic process because it considers all the risk and safe factors, depending on what type of skin the infant has.

RESULTS
The first graph labeled as Graph A: Survival Rates between the ages of 10 months to 25 years old, the survival rate for surgical treatments is 25%. The survival rate of therapeutic treatments is 75%. According to (Oji et al, 2012), The mainstay of treatment remains with moisturizing cream, for example, urea, lactic acid and other humectants and keratolytics, regular bathing, and mechanical scale removal. With surgical and therapeutic treatments combined, the survival rate in all, including the age range, is 50% which is low, based on the rareness of this disease.

For patients to be satisfied is the most important feeling that a doctor should know, when going through a treatment. Moving on to the second graph, labeled as Graph B: Patient Satisfaction. The percentage of patients that felt satisfied when undergoing the surgical treatment is 25%. As stated by (Tsivilika et al, 2022), Apart from the complications caused by the infants immature growth, actions should be taken to prevent electrolyte imbalance, respiratory distress, malnutrition, and infection. The percentage of patients that felt satisfied when undergoing the therapeutic treatment is 85%. With surgical and therapeutic treatments combined for patient satisfaction, the percentage is 60%.

The third graph, labeled as Graph C: Clinical Outcomes Mortality Rates. The rate or percentage of surgical treatments for Harlequin Ichthyosis clinical outcomes is 45%. The rate of percentage of therapeutic treatments for Harlequin Ichthyosis clinical outcomes is 83%. For clinical outcomes mortality rates for Harlequin Ichthyosis, the surgical and therapeutic treatments combined mortality rate is 38%. Mortality rates are dependent on what treatment is fit best for the patient. According to (Hovnanian 2005), This discovery of the role of ABCA12 in HI reveals a major role of lipid transport in the formation of the skin barrier and its function.

DATA ANALYSIS
Harlequin Ichthyosis: Surgical and Therapeutic procedures are a long process for the skin to fully develop in perfection but its solutions and ways have made board certified dermatologists to choose therapeutic treatment. These graphs have been synthesized in qualitative data. Combining percentages from other data is the technique used specifically to create this graph. These percentages represent which procedure is less riskier and safe for an infant. Shown above, the first graph labeled as Graph A: Survival Rates indicates the percentage of patients that have survived with both of these treatments. Surgical treatment was seen as obvious that would bring pain to patients almost 25% of infants survived. While on the other hand, therapeutic treatments are way safer and less riskier, considering it is 75%.

Based on the patient's age, the dermatologist will choose the treatment but risks are always there. The second graph labeled as Graph B: Patient Satisfactions has two percentages for separate treatments. Around 25% of patients felt satisfied when undergoing the surgical treatment which is pretty low and also seems painful. Around 85% of patients felt satisfied undergoing the therapeutic treatment which indicates the less risks that were taken. The third and final graph labeled as Graph C: Clinical Outcomes Mortality Rates shows therapeutic treatments had more of a successful outcome than surgical treatments.

CONCLUSION
Both treatments have indicated risks from negative and positive perspectives. With the results being calculated, therapeutic treatments and interventions have the most long-term outcomes and safest factors for patients with Harlequin Ichthyosis. There were three qualitative analyses conducted in this research paper. Skin grafting and skin reconstruction that come along in surgical interventions have proven to be more riskier as shown in the results since they are low in patient satisfaction and high in mortality rates. While on the other hand, therapeutic procedures are high in patient satisfaction and low in mortality rates which showcases a great potential for deeper effectiveness. The research of Harlequin Ichthyosis still continues to advance in the future of the treatments and medical practices. Researching and making more treatment for therapeutic interventions can be more feasible for patients as well looking deeper into their protocols for effectiveness for HI.

WORKS CITED
Shrestha, A. B., et al. (2022). Harlequin ichthyosis: A case report and literature review. Clinical Case Reports.
Rajpopat S, et al. (2011). Harlequin Ichthyosis: A Review of Clinical and Molecular Findings in 45 Cases. Arch Dermatol.
Maria T, et al. (2023). Harlequin Ichthyosis Management: A Narrative Review. Children.
Baldo, F., et al. (2021). Juvenile idiopathic arthritis in Harlequin ichthyosis. Pediatric Rheumatology.
Niu, X., et al. (2023). Long-term survival of harlequin ichthyosis in two siblings with novel ABCA12 mutations. International Journal of Dermatology.
Sung Jae Ahn, and Jong Won Hong. (2018). Surgical Treatment of Syndactyly of Harlequin Ichthyosis. Archives of Hand and Microsurgery.
Margulies, I. G., Harburg, L., and Zellner, E. (2019). Surgical management of harlequin ichthyosis. Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery.
Harvey, H. B., Shaw, M., and Morrell, D. S. (2009). Perinatal management of harlequin ichthyosis. Journal of Perinatology.
Hovnanian, A. (2005). Harlequin ichthyosis unmasked. Journal of Clinical Investigation.
Chang, L. M., and Reyes, M. (2014). A case of harlequin ichthyosis treated with isotretinoin. Dermatology Online Journal.
Sussmath, K., Traupe, H., Metze, D., and Oji, V. (2020). Ichthyoses in everyday practice. Journal Der Deutschen Dermatologischen Gesellschaft.