
Drake Mcdonald
Innovation High School
AP Capstone: Research
Joseph Fasani
4/29/2024
Is the current public education system negatively affecting both preadolescents and adolescents levels of stress, sleep and academic performances?

Introduction:
Public education is very important for many people. It is more accessible, it is more diverse, and more importantly, it is free. But is the future prepared for their students a good one? In a current report on college dropouts it reported that over 40% of college students drop out every year with an estimated amount of 43.3 million college dropouts in the US. (Flores 1). The same study states that college dropouts earn 56.15% less than college graduates, with median annual earnings of $39,900 compared to $91,000 for those with a bachelor's degree or higher (Flores 1). Not to mention that diplomas and degrees have been ingrained into being a necessity for jobs, even jobs that don't need much skills require you to have at least a highschool diploma (Dorn, 2). So not only is there a clear flaw in the current education system since of the clear amount of dropouts, there is also a drawback that basically requires you to pass this flawed system.

Public education's academic pressure on students:
There is much to talk about when dissecting the flaws in the education system. One prevalent example is the strain it has on the student's mental health. To be more exact, it is the academic pressure that is heavily pushed onto students. The impact of stress on students in secondary school and higher education was a study conducted by the International Journal of Adolescence and Youth. The purpose of this study was to investigate the relationship between mental health, particularly stress and depression, and academic performance in adolescents and young adults. To do this, it used longitudinal analyses, surveys, and observational studies. The findings of this study was that there is a prevalence of stress and depression among preadolescents and adolescents, indicating a significant impact on academic performance. In light of this research, it becomes quite apparent that students are unnecessarily put under immense pressure and strain.

College's effect on a student's well being:
Managing a system that prioritizes academic performance without adequate consideration for their mental well-being is a major problem in the education system. After graduating high school, adolescents are given a choice to higher their education to a level that would allow them to get a decent paying job. The problem though is unlike elementary, middle and high-school, students have to pay for college. But over half of the students who graduate college are in debt (Rivera, 1). A report written by Melanie Hanson called Average Time to Repay Student Loans talks about the average time to repay student loans. The findings of this report was that the average borrower takes way longer than the ideal 10 years to repay student loans and instead took closer to 20 years to finish paying off their debt. One highlight to the report was that some professional graduates take over 45 years to repay student loans which is just abysmal.

Public Education's impact on sleep:
The Association between Sleep Patterns, Educational Identity, and School Performance in Adolescents was a study conducted to investigate the associations between sleep patterns, sleep-recovery strategies, educational identity, and school performance among adolescents. It explores how the duration and quality of sleep during the week and on weekends and how the implementation of sleep-recovery strategies are linked to adolescents' educational identity processes and academic achievement. The method this study used was a cross sectional analysis. The participants involved were categorized based on social jetlag and weekend catch-up sleep. The conclusion to this study was that longer sleep durations and earlier bedtimes are associated with higher academic performance, social jetlag negatively correlates with school performance, indicating that misalignments in sleep schedules during the week and weekend have implications for academic outcomes.

Conclusion
With all these problems in the current education system ranging from public education negatively affecting people's sleep and sleep schedule which plays a huge factor in performances in school and even in daily life to the environment being questionable if it is really safe for a child. Is the current public education system negatively affecting both preadolescents and adolescents levels of stress, sleep and academic performances? The gap my research paper will be trying to fill is the information needed to prove that the current public education system is negatively affecting both preadolescents and adolescents overall well-being and academic performances. Moreover, not only will this addressing this gap provide valuable insights in the public education system, it will also help give valuable insight and ideas to policymakers and educators for potential interventions for a healthier learning environment for its students.

Method
The focus of inquiry will be a meta analysis that examines and synthesizes existing research on the relationship between academic pressure and mental health outcomes among both preadolescents and adolescents. This method is best suited as it allows a versatile and comprehensive analysis on a vast and diverse amount of studies, giving a much better and composed understanding on how the current education system is affecting the overall well being and academic performances of its students. The design of this study will be a systematic review, to extract information from a wide variety of sources to further broaden knowledge on the factor levels of stress, sleep, anxiety and academic performances on preadolescents and adolescents that are negatively affected by the public education system.

This method also involves variables, two of them are the overall well-being and academic performance of students which is the dependent variable, and the structure of the public education system which is the independent variable. The subjects of this study are Public Schools/Colleges, adolescents and pre adolescents.

The sampling methods are surveys, interviews, observations, and analyses which is justified because this study will be a meta analysis. The sampling methods will be used to collect information like the prevalence rates and risk rates and even the effects that the public education system has on preadolescents and adolescents. Scholarly websites will be used to gather the information that this research paper needs for having a diverse amount of research. The procedure to this method is a meta-analysis being used to compile both quantitative and qualitative data for the research paper. The quantitative data being the percentages of individuals levels of anxiety while the qualitative being the severity and after effects of bullying among peers.

Data Collection:
The purpose of this data section is to present this research paper's findings on the flaws of the public education system. To start off with, stress is created when a person is unable to fulfill the demands and expectations asked by or imposed on him/her (Auerbach and Grambling, 1998). Around 46.7% students accept that their workload is a part of stress (Pathak et al.,37). When individuals are exposed to stress, it can lead to changes or disruptions in how the brain functions and how behavior is regulated. (McEwen 2000, 2007, as cited in Eiland and Romeo 165). Mental health problems of perpetrators are a risk factor for school shootings, but mostly in combination with other significant psychopathology such as antisocial personality or extreme social rejection (Flannery, D. J., Modzeleski, W., and Kretschmar, J. M., 2012). Among adolescents, factors such as peer pressure and conformity tend to have a stronger influence on engaging in risky behaviors compared to factors like popularity and general conformity (Santor et al., 2000). Peer pressure is a highlight to socially induced sleep-delaying behavior (Godsell, 2019). Taking away the sleep of a teenager could lead them from psychological wellness to a psychiatric illness (Walker, 2017). Lack of sleep can also cause detriments in verbal creativity and academic performances for students (Taras and Potts-Datema, 2005).

This data was collected in a very simple way. First multitude of sources were scanned, then information about the percentages were found of each category and added together. To make this bar graph more accurate and simple, it had to equal 100%. The math was very simple. First you have to add all the percentages together. Ex) if you had 4 percentages, 30%, 54%, 28%, and 91%, first you add the numerical value of all the percentages. The total value will be 203%, then you will just need to divide the given percentages by the total value and multiply that by 100. (0.3/2.03) x 100 = 14.78% (Values will be rounded by the nearest hundredth to make more simpler), (0.54/2.03) x 100 = 26.6%, (0.28/2.03) x 100 = 13.79%, (0.91/2.03) x 100 = 44.83%, 14.78 + 26.6 + 13.79 + 44.83 = 100%.

Data Analysis:
In the first bar graph shown, the graph about the toll of public education, it shows four values. Sleep deprivation (39%), Academic Stress (32%), Mental Health (10%), and College Dropouts (19%). This graph depicts that there is a prevalence of stress and depression among preadolescents and adolescents that indicates a significant impact on academic performance. This relates with Pathak's research that around 46.7% students accept that their workload is a part of stress because academic stress is the 2nd biggest toll on this graph. Sleep is also the biggest toll on the graph which only strengthens with Taras and Potts-Datema point about how a student's academic performance and verbal creativity will suffer from lack of sleep. The final insight from this graph underscores the profound impact of public education on students' mental well-being, with nearly 42% of the student body experiencing compromised mental health.

In the 2nd bar graph, the graph about student loan debt (SLD) per student at graduation by year, it highlights a hidden aspect that many students will be forced to face, financial stress. The average student loan debt at graduation increased by 106% before adjusting for inflation. After adjusting for inflation, it's currently 41%.

In the 3rd and final graph, the graph shows the age categories (preadolescents, adolescents, specifically only college students) average sleep compared to their recommended sleep. The graph shows that students don't get their recommended amount of sleep.

Discussion:
Throughout this whole research paper's process, from introducing a methodology to actually executing it, and then analyzing the presented data. It can be concluded from how public education starts early to the amount of stress they give, that It does affect pre-adolescents and adolescents levels of sleep stress and academic performances. There are many solutions that can fix parts of the problem with the current public education system. These solutions that are currently being discussed will now be stated. Later School Start Times is the first solution. A Reformed System to reduce the academic stress put onto students is the second solution. Financial Solutions for college students or incoming college students is the third solution.

Work Cited:
Auerbach, S. M., and Grambling, S. E. (1998). Stress management: psychological foundations. Prentice-Hall.
Bacaro, V. et al. (2023). The Association between Sleep Patterns, Educational Identity, and School Performance. Brain Sciences.
ChildStats.gov. Adolescent Depression.
Eiland, L., and Romeo, R. D. (2013). Stress and the developing adolescent brain. Neuroscience.
Flannery, D. J., Modzeleski, W., and Kretschmar, J. M. (2012). Violence and School Shootings. Current Psychiatry Reports.
Flores, G. (2024). College dropout rate statistics. Learnopoly.
Hanson, M. (2023). Average time to pay off student loans. Education Data Initiative.
Mbous, Y. P. V. et al. (2022). Psychosocial correlates of insomnia among college students. Preventing Chronic Disease.
Pascoe, M. C., Hetrick, S. E., and Parker, A. G. (2019). The impact of stress on students in secondary school. International Journal of Adolescence and Youth.
Pathak, N., Goyal, M. K., and Tiwari, R. (2023). Effect of Stress on the Academic Achievements of Students. International Journal of Information Dissemination and Technology.
Rivera, H. (2023). Student loan debt statistics. Bankrate.
Santor, D. A., Messervey, D., and Kusumakar, V. (2000). Measuring peer pressure, popularity, and conformity in adolescent boys and girls. Journal of Youth and Adolescence.
Taras, H., and Potts-Datema, W. (2005). Sleep and student performance at school. Journal of School Health.
Walker, M. (2017). Why we sleep. Simon and Schuster.