
Mena Sahion
Mr. Fasani
AP Research
April 2024
The Barbie Effect

Barbie premiered in Los Angeles on July 9, 2023, and was released in the United States on July 21. Directed by Greta Gerwig, Margot Robbie plays Barbie, and Ryan Gosling is Ken. They go on an adventure in Barbie Land and in the modern day Venice Beach, dealing with big questions about life. The movie talks about patriarchy and feminism. The Barbie movie improved Mattel's brand management in several ways. It strengthened the brand's focus on empowering women, expanded its audience reach, generated excitement and interest, and offered more options for merchandise. (Chakraborty and Biswal). The marketing plan underpinning the Barbie movie demonstrates how corporate entities can stage a brand comeback and potentially check off most, if not all, of its business objectives. Mattel has also taken steps to resolve Barbie's problems in the present, including competition from Barbie's peer brands, changing tastes from Barbie's target consumers, bad publicity stemming from social media, and diversity issues. The Barbie movie was great for Mattel. It raised the Barbie brand's esteem, expanded its potential market, and it generated buzz.

The summer of 2023 Generation Z around the United States, ages 12-27, watched the Barbie movie. It has been the talk of the summer, nobody stopped talking about it. In fact in the first week it has brought in $162 million during its opening weekend in the U.S. (Riske). The financial relationship and impact the Barbie movie had on Generation Z is still a mystery. In this research paper, the main question that will be answered: How does exposure to Barbie movies among Gen Z influence financial behavior, and in what ways do the narratives and ideas portrayed in these movies contribute to decisions regarding spending, saving, and investing money later in life? With the growth and world wide talk of the movie Barbie, one can assume that teenagers spend more after viewing the movie.

A simple Google search will tell you that qualitative research seeks to understand phenomena by exploring ideas, opinions and experiences. Another simple Google search will tell you that quantitative research gathers and analyzes numerical data in order to quantify relationships, patterns and trends. In this research it will be a mix of quantitative and qualitative. This style of both will help explore and investigate how Generation Z spends and invests both qualitatively and quantitatively. The purpose of this is to explore how Gen-Z spends and invests with both qualitative and quantitative investigation. The case study will look into how Gen Z spend and invests in both methods of research with no surveys made, but thorough investigations in data and information to understand two style of research and how that information can be extracted from both. Quantitatively, financial spending and investing reports, as well as statistics will be required for this sub-section of the case study. This includes the exploration of how the younger generation within this age group spend on average, as well as the types of purchases Gen Z makes compared to the older members of the population. On the other hand, social media statistics analysis will also be used to determine trends in the main participants' spending and investing.

Teens who spend more time on social media are more likely to get influenced by celebrities and their friends into buying random things they do not need, which may result in a very common symptom of fear of missing out, which is also known as FOMO. Mayank Gupta and Aditya Sharma discussed this in, Fear of missing out: A brief overview of origin, theoretical underpinnings and relationship with mental health, saying, Fear of missing out (FoMO) is a unique term introduced in 2004 to describe a phenomenon observed on social networking sites. FoMO includes two processes; firstly, perception of missing out, followed up with a compulsive behavior to maintain these social connections. With a movie like the Barbie movie, it has been the talk of the summer. With trends like Barbiecore everyone wants to buy the latest new pink clothes, bows, even Birkenstocks. Exposure to the Barbie movies among Gen Z do influence financial behavior, causing them to spend more money with fear of missing out from their peers.

Birkenstocks, as we know it, is a famous shoe company. They could go for up to 100 dollars. The iconic Birkenstock Arizona appears in Margot Robbie's movie Barbie. Surprisingly, the world embraced Birkenstock's return to fame with open arms. Not only did Generation Z rush to their local department stores, desperate to step into the blue magic of their stock, but Birkenstock also managed to capitalize on the global exposure. A reel posted on the brand's Instagram, complete with the caption Real-world comfort you can't resist, appeared the day after the movie's debut. The caption was a direct reference to the movie's storyline, and it was titled It's a pink pink world. (Goldin)

The effect of the Barbie doll and movie causes widespread attention. In 1997, the brand generated a significant sum of $1.7 billion in sales, which was approximately 40% of total revenues of $4.5 billion. (Mullins). Barbie also claims 40 registered trademarks. From June 17-July 16, 2023, Robbie was 39.9x more in-demand than the average talent worldwide. The Barbie audience is 66.2% female. Barbie's audience is significantly younger, with 74.6% under the age of 29, with nearly half (46.6%) below the age of 22. (PARROT). A recent survey reveals that 22% of Barbie's audience hadn't been to a movie theater in years.

The Barbiecore aesthetic not only restored passive consumer demand but also vitalized spending across a range of product categories. For the US toy manufacturer Mattel Inc., which produces the first and original Barbie doll, the launch of the movie represented a crucial moment of financial significance. The release of Barbie came on the heels of the pandemic-induced slump in sales in the toy industry. Mattel's had partnerships with more than 100 companies illustrates how much money was at stake for the company. Post-Barbie movie, customer spending indeed significantly increased because of the practice of buying matching outfits and because of the need to refresh wardrobes and invest in dolls and associated merchandise. (Felsted)

Global sales of cosmetics did better, according to JP Morgan; however, makeup suffered a downturn due to the work-from-home culture emerging with Covid-19. Social media was the perfect medium to facilitate this trend (Barbiecore hashtag with more than 500 millions views on TikTok). The audience on TikTok is Generation Z, who will be the main generation leading the shift in tastes in certain consumer goods markets. Retailers have been bustling, making the most of Barbiecore and have launched Barbie clothing and Barbie accessories.

In conclusion, the Barbie movie among Gen Z influences financial behavior, and the ideas portrayed in these movies contribute to decisions regarding spending, saving, and investing money later in life. With the growth and world wide talk of the movie Barbie, teenagers spend more after viewing the movie. Here are three simple solutions which can help. Teach people that Barbie's world isn't real, and it's okay not to have everything she has. This helps people understand that Barbie's lifestyle is make-believe. Help people handle the fear of missing out by practicing mindfulness, setting realistic goals, and appreciating what they already have. Teach kids and young adults how to manage money wisely in school and community programs.

Works Cited
Chakraborty, Uttam, and Santosh Kumar Biswal. The Barbie Movie: The Emergence of a New Era for Branding. SAGE Publications: SAGE Business Cases Originals, 2024.
Felsted, Andrea. Barbie Movie: Barbiecore Wins Over Consumers From Quiet Luxury This Summer. Bloomberg, 16 July 2023.
Goldin, Isabel. Birkenstock Sales Success and How The Barbie Movie Redefined Brand Marketing. Medium, 1 August 2023.
MORGAN, J.P. How COVID-19 has transformed consumer spending habits. J.P. Morgan.
Mullins, Paul R. International Journal of Historical Archaeology, 1999.
PARROT. Explosive demand for the Barbenheimer casts shows why neither movie will bomb. Parrot Analytics, 21 July 2023.
Riske, Heather. UMSL economics graduate Barb Flowers talks Barbie and the evolution of women in the workforce on NPR. UMSL Blogs, 31 July 2023.
Rudoy, Matthew. 22% Of Barbie's Audience Hadn't Been To The Movies In Years, According To Survey. Screen Rant, 14 August 2023.
Sharma, Aditya. Fear of missing out: A brief overview of origin, theoretical underpinnings and relationship with mental health. NCBI.