
Shan Patel
Mr. Fasani
AP Research
April 29, 2024
Profitability On Bee Decline
Word Count: 4455

Western Honey Bees, also known as Apis Mellifera is broadly recognized as a type of insect within the overarching family, specifically identified as a species of bees. Bees in general provide an insurmountable amount of benefits to our environment, and more specifically the economy of various countries since money is what brings attention to issues. The problem at hand is that honey bees, bumble bees, and just bees in general are being exposed to certain types of harmful pesticides in both lethal and sublethal doses that can damage them. People may think that sublethal doses of something is much better than being faced against a lethal one, however since pesticides are formed of multiple agrochemicals, these compounds can cause damaging side effects that can alter the nervous system of these bees, making the bees suffer instead of a quicker death. (Lehmann, 2021) It is absolutely outrageous how the very creatures that pollinate our crops are being killed at a moment's notice, and the rage-inducing part about it is that not many people or powerful organizations are caring about it. (Pugh, 2017). Statistically speaking, just honey bees, which are a type of species, pollinate over $15 Billion worth of crops in just the United States every single year.

To go in depth, there are several factors that contribute to the gradual decline of bee populations, some commonly identified and agreed upon factors are habitat loss, exposure to pesticides, climate change, pathogens and viruses, and poor nutrition. Majority of these conditions are anthropogenic, or caused by human activity, habitat loss can be due to humans cutting the homes of the local bees that pollinate their crops, and exposure to pesticides which are clearly caused by humans that do not notice their environmental footprint and endlessly spray these harmful and severely damaging pesticides all over their crops. (Pugh, 2017)

Which is why the research method chosen for this paper is action research. I would like to combat and question the problem of the agriculture department in the United States dropping consistently and how the gradual decline of bees contributes to the decrease of the agriculture department shares of the Gross Domestic Product. The particular problem has been identified, the solution and the review of the solution has not yet been formed and is unknown. Action has been taken and the motive of this research paper is to thoroughly research multiple aspects of the bee decline that has been referenced and studied extensively but has not provided an effective and efficient solution based on the research conducted. What I hope for the solution is for it to pave towards an environmentally-friendly pesticide that can specifically target the mosquitoes and other insects that carry deadly viruses from other regions, but also not affect the species of bees that commonly pollinate their crops in the local area.

General trends found in the research conducted identifies the common contributions of bee decline and colony loss which are habitat loss, poor nutrition, climate change, and importantly pesticide exposure. The research also identified that honey bees contribute upwards of $15 Billion of the annual gross domestic income in the agriculture sector. Governments, organizations and individuals aren't taking this issue seriously and shrug it off, then wonder why the agriculture sector is contributing less and less to the Gross Domestic Product of the United States and is being replaced by utilities, matter of fact, the agriculture, forestry, fishing, and hunting department has the lowest share of GDP in the United States as of 2022 with only a miniscule 1.1% of contributions. This is a staggering 4.3% lower than 2021 which contributed a respectable 5.4% share of the United States Gross Domestic Product. According to the United States Department of Agriculture, The output of America's farms contributed $164.7 billion of this sum about 0.7 percent of U.S. GDP. I strongly believe that the gradual bee decline has contributed to the decreased percentage of agricultural productivity and share in the United States Gross Domestic Product from 2021 to 2022.

Gap: The particular gap found within the research is that there is a lack of information surrounding the aspect of which chemicals inside the pesticides produced affect which parts of the bee's system. There isn't much information surrounding the issue of which parts of the body are being affected by the dangerous chemicals inside the many pesticides used to keep pesky insects away from harming the quality of the farmer's crops. Addressing this gap in the research will benefit the topic and other scholars who wish to research upon this topic as it will allow them to go more in depth about the harmful effects of pesticides onto the bees themselves.

Research Question: How does profitability contribute to people taking notice of the negative effect of pesticide usage onto worker bees in the United States from 2006 and onwards?

Methods: The research methods used in this study are action research, and delphi method. I want to use the action research method because it seems the most appropriate and effective to try and answer the question. The procedure of the action research seems structured, including the identification of the problem, the solution and further the review of the solution. The delphi method will most likely be used as an extension of the overall information known to try and make a forecast prediction of the events that are to come after a certain period of time, including trends.

Assumptions: An assumption that can be made about the variables based on the research study is that pesticides are guaranteed to be lethal and instantly eliminate all bees no matter what species and genetic differences they have that let them survive.

Hypothesis: If the farmers and agricultural department of the United States were to take into consideration the chemicals in the pesticide, then the honey bee populations could be saved from gradual decline.

Methods Section:
The instruments being used in this action-research study can provide a unique collection of data and information based on references from previously seen data. The plan on creating graphs based on already-existing data points is to generate observations upon which claims will be made. These data points will focus on both quantitative and qualitative data regarding matters such as the Gross Domestic Product of multiple countries throughout different continents on Earth, with a deep emphasis compared to that of the United States.

The quantitative data could be inferred as the rate of bee decline caused specifically by these pesticides and chemicals through a specific amount of time. There are examples of quantitative data in this particular scenario, such as a report from April 2021 to April 2022 had concluded that Texas had an annual loss of 33.9% for bee colonies. 1 in 6 bee species are regionally extinct, which indicates that the end for bees is near. A staggering 42% of bee colonies collapsed in the United States in 2015, due to multiple causes such as poor nutrition, lack of genetic diversity which results in faster mortality rates due to slow adaptability, habitat loss, and especially pesticide exposure.

There may be a trending pattern throughout the course of a couple set years in the United States and correlations will be made to honey bee population decline and gradual extinction in parts of the country. The plan is to utilize the action research method in order to identify the frequently occurring problem in the environment of which the honeybee populations are declining due to direct use of pesticide onto the hives and groups of bees. Along with this, a solution will be created based on the research and data collected and external information.

Data Section:
Data has been used in order to support claims made in this research study. Techniques used to graph data will be bar charts, in order to figure out certain values of how many colonies throughout the United States had been reported to be collapsed, along with line charts to describe the Gross Domestic Product of the United States from multiple years. Tools used to pull data include EBSCO Information Services, key websites across the internet regarding this particular topic, and expert researchers who have prior experience talking about this matter.

The research question that will have resources and time put into it, is How does profitability contribute to people taking notice of the negative effect of pesticide usage onto worker bees in the United States from 2006 and onwards? One of the possible ways is by analyzing information about the economy of the United States and several other countries around the world. The Gross Domestic Product of the United States in the year 2015 was $18.21 Trillion USD, compared to the Gross Domestic Product in 2016, which was reported to be around $18.74 Trillion USD. Based on this GDP data from both years, in 2015, the agricultural sector of the Gross Domestic Product was approximately $1.05 Trillion USD, just around 6%, approximately 5.7% of the total percentage of the entire GDP of the United States. Compared to 2016, in which the agricultural sector produced around $136.7 Billion USD. Within the research question, the year 2006 was specifically chosen due to the first Colony Collapse Disorder issue being reported. According to the United States Department of Agriculture, the average annual losses of colonies rose to around 15-22 percent of the colonies that were being monitored.

Findings and Analysis:
Quantitative data in my academic paper suggests that 1 in 6 bee species are regionally extinct in certain regions of the United States. Along with this, 40% of bees are vulnerable to extinction. This category of evidence describes the issue of bees going extinct, and solely addresses the statistics about bees gradually becoming extinct throughout the country. Qualitative data in my academic paper suggests that anthropogenic causes such as pesticide usage are leading to bee decline throughout the country. The Gross Domestic Product of the United States and other countries around the world are being impacted due to the bee species dying, which results in less pollination for crops, leading to less annual yield, the agricultural sector of multiple countries are contributing less and less each year due to bee extinction. From all this evidence, an understanding I can make is that anthropogenic causes for global bee extinction such as pesticide usage, is leading to weaker economies of certain countries around the world due to a lack of urgency of bee extinction.

Conclusion:
From what we have seen, profitability plays a major role in bringing attention to issues around the world due to the sheer value of currency and benefits that individuals or organizations may receive from participating in the matter. The sheer impact of bees contributes billions of dollars annually in the form of pollination for crops, vegetables, and fruits. These said fruits, vegetables, and crops, are then taken to the market to sell in which the farmers and transporters take a cut from the revenue. Despite all this, barely anyone realizes the power of bees and how crucial their existence is in the world. In this specific scenario, profitability did actually result in people noticing the gradual decline of bee populations by anthropogenic causes such as humans spraying pesticides and neonicotinoids.

Works Cited
Lehmann DM, Camp AA (2021) A systematic scoping review of the methodological approaches and effects of pesticide exposure on solitary bees. PLoS ONE.
Boff, Samuel, Raizer, Josue, Lupi, Daniela (2020) Environmental Display Can Buffer the Effect of Pesticides on Solitary Bees. Insects.
Borges, S. et al. (2021). Overview of the testing and assessment of effects of microbial pesticides on bees. Apidologie.
Pugh S. (2017). This Is Not the Bee's Knees: A Critical View of the Government's Lack of Policy to Conserve the Pollinators. Sustainable Development Law and Policy.
Saad MAA, et al. (2023). Toxicological Impact of Certain Pesticides on Honeybee. Assiut Journal of Agricultural Sciences.
Najib, K. L., and Hassan, A. S. (2021). Food and environmental degradation as causative agents of honey bee colonies decline. Journal of Nigerian Society of Physical Sciences.
Vanegas, M. (2017). The Silent Beehive: How the Decline of Honey Bee Populations Shifted the EPA's Pesticide Policy. Ecology Law Quarterly.
Stokstad, E. (2017). European bee study fuels debate over pesticide ban. Science.
Decourtye, A., Henry, M., and Desneux, N. (2013). Environment: Overhaul pesticide testing on bees. Nature.
Harwood, G. P., and Dolezal, A. G. (2020). Pesticide-Virus Interactions in Honey Bees. Viruses.