Word Count: 4,063
AP Research Paper
April 30, 2026
The Rippling Effects of The Banana Wars in Honduras
What were the social consequences of the Banana Wars (1903-1925) for local populations in Honduras? Banana Wars in Honduras refers to a period of U.S. military intervention (1903-1925) that supported the political and economic interests of American banana companies, such as the United Fruit Company. These interventions were characterized by the deployment of U.S. troops to crush strikes, suppress revolutions, and ensure the company's control over land, railways, and banana exports, despite being officially framed as actions to restore stability or protect U.S. economic interests. The research at hand is very significant for the Hondurans who experienced the Banana Wars and their children and grandchildren, since the foreign intervention and corporate control have affected the social hierarchy and the inequalities that exist up to now. The knowledge about these impacts serves as a way to inform people about the prolonged effects of economic imperialism and the neglected historical events.
Currently, there is a noticeable lack of research on the Honduran social atmosphere during this time frame. Banana Wars have been the primary focus of research and have been written about in depth, especially with countries like Nicaragua, Haiti, and Guatemala being the primary focus. The way in which Hondurans were impacted by the Banana Wars, including the individual experiences of workers and family members, has been overlooked. Most of the research that has been conducted on Honduras in the Banana Wars is at a broad level, mainly focusing on the political and economic tensions. This study will specifically focus on how the quality of life for Hondurans were affected during the Banana Wars. The quality of life refers to housing, environmental factors, access to food and basic healthcare. As well as having access to necessities like water and living essentials. More specifically, how did living conditions change? Why did they change? How was food affected? Was the community in favor or against the U.S. Intervention? Those are the things that will be focused on in a societal lens. While the money aspect and political aspect have plenty of data to look back on, actual testimony from Hondurans and their descendants during and after the war are not accessible or documented. Addressing this gap and this subject itself, will be substantially important for providing Hondurans the context of why society and living conditions are the way they are now in the country. It's greatly important to understand irregular warfare, during the time these events took place there was no media coverage or news outlet to inform the public.
Therefore, many people were and still are unaware. Research will be mostly based on Primary Data. Oral histories from those with lived experiences, historical newspapers of that time and records, Honduran national archives. Some secondary sources will be used as well, such as Scholarly journals written about the event, articles and reports from international organizations. The process for this research would include: Getting consent and permission from participants, interviewing participants and recording all data. Finding Important Primary Sources and applying it to research, as well as finding useful Secondary sources and applying to Research. Lastly log all data and make connections to arguments. This research will contribute to a deeper understanding of the social consequences of the Banana Wars, highlighting the experiences of ordinary Hondurans and the long term effects of foreign intervention.
The evolution of this topic has changed many times over the years. Due to the event happening so frequently but during times where technology was lacking. Many archives or first hand accounts have been lost to time or are unreachable for geographical reasons. With the sources provided within the research, there has been information shared from 1981-1993 where the study focused on explaining military involvement in Central America. ("Central America, 1981-1993").
The study focuses on a certain time frame but has a very broad scope, focusing on the continent rather than individual countries. In a later study published in 2014, the author focused on the efforts of national building from the U.S in the Caribbean and Central America starting from the 1910s-1920s. (Crandall 109-260). Which once again has a broad scope of this issue and speaks about multiple different countries and the guerrilla warfare in those countries. A major influence and advancement into the topic that is supporting this research would be author and historian Lester D. Langley who was one of the many who studied it but one of the first who wrote and published a book about the Banana Wars. In 1983 he introduced the name "Banana Wars" and from there many articles, news letters and authors referred to this event as the "Banana Wars".
The assumed limitations that will be faced for this study is having limited access to archives and Incomplete or biased archival records, limited generalizability due to regional focus and difficulty in accessing oral histories due to time and geography. These may delay data collection and limit the depth of research. Ways to combat these limitations would be to use digital archives and online sources to better access Honduran Archives, use multiple sources to balance bias, use video calls or recorded interviews to reach participants remotely. Lastly, to compare findings with broader studies from similar regions in the country to highlight both unique and shared experiences.
Many people have different opinions on the certain topics behind the Banana Wars. Including U.S imperialism (Crandall 109-260), U.S. intervention for economic interest or resistance in Central America. In this study for example, the author claims that the motives behind the U.S actions are not for protecting the sovereignty of Central Americans but instead to commit counterinsurgency. Instead of allowing countries to accept or decline their companies' participation in the country, they intervene so that there is no choice. ("Central America, 1981-1993"). The legitimacy of foreign influence is often questioned as well. Whether it is a good idea to allow a major power to have a say in foreign politics when no real threat is being posed to the U.S itself. (Stoyack).
The sources used were imperative to the research because while most don't focus solely on Honduras, they provide a necessary context. They introduce information before and after the time period that this research is focused on. Providing an inward scope on the overall effect of the wars on a continental value. It explains the pattern as well of the United States against Central America, further supporting the purpose of this research and the importance of being knowledgeable on the history that has shaped what society looks like in those countries. As well as the current economical and political buildup has become as a result of those events that took place. The quality of the sources is important, ("Monroe Doctrine 1823") is a general resource of information while, (Stoyack) is more of a reputable magazine. The majority of the sources included within this research paper are limited on the social consequences of the Banana Wars. There are no current sources that look into the current quality of life/consequence after the Banana Wars for the Honduran people.
The methods that most of the articles used were looked at, where looking at data and logging many archival U.S records and a few first hand accounts from countries in Central America. Due to most not being directly from Honduras, or not every account being first hand the research that will be conducted in this study will be different from the sources used. The way they conducted their analysis is different. Some studies had people voting rather than answering questions and their data was based on numbers rather than words. The accounts that other researchers have could be comparable to what this research gathers due to the fact that accounts can be similar but will be different due to regional and geographical differences. Other countries faced more brutal changes within society during the Banana Wars, while the country this research focused on has different struggles. Either way the data, line of reasoning and evidence will be slightly inspired by the other researchers and their methods, due to them being so successful.
This study will be using a mixed methods case study design. A case study is a meticulous examination of a specific subject within its real world context. The case study will focus on the social consequences of the Banana Wars in Honduras. More specifically banana zone communities and their descendants. Within the use of mixed methods, there will be a combination of both qualitative and quantitative elements such as interviews, oral histories and surveying how many people can agree or disagree to a specific statement. A case study best fits this research because it allows a deeper, more contextual understanding of how the Banana Wars affected the local communities in Honduras and not just broad national statistics. Mixed methods allows the public to take in different forms of data and interpretation that can be understood through patterns or numerical data. Other methods were not ideal for this type of research due to the fact that this historically based paper can't be expressed through experiments or only using archival research. It requires responses and lived experiences from people related to the event itself, which is best seen through combining detailed narratives and simple numerical patterns across participants. The participants that will be studied and interviewed in this study are Honduran-born citizens or people who have lived or currently reside in the country itself. More specially people who live near the banana zone regions. More specifically areas like Tela, Trujillo or La Ceiba. This research process is aligned to the research question because it also focused on the social consequences of the Banana Wars for local populations in Honduras while also keeping the investigation centered on how foreign influence and power affects the day to day life of ordinary local Hondurans.
More precisely, people who were directly affected or know of someone who was affected by the establishment of U.S backed Banana companies during the 1900's-1920's and on are important as well. The sample size for this study is limited due to distance and time. On record there are less than 50 participants being interviewed therefore, data collected from this study only represents a small portion of the lived experiences of people in Honduras or from Honduras. The demographics are mostly focused on older generations meaning those that are 30+ years old because they tend to have a greater memory or knowledge of the event and those affected by it than younger generations. Due to the U.S Backed Banana Companies pulling out of the country during the 1960's-1970's. Many older generations remember that period but younger generations were not around for it. People around the banana zones are prioritized due to this study's purpose of exploring a focused lens on the subject over a generalized national representation. A smaller focused sample can also match the case studies purpose of having quality over quantity.
Tools that will be used during the data collection section of this study will be structured interviews. There will be recorded questions that will be asked consecutively to the participants and their responses will be recorded. To record responses, recording devices will be used, such as tablets, phones, microphones, and voice recording applications where the only people who have access to responses and recordings will be the researcher. Consent forms have been created and provided to participants, as well as explaining how the study will proceed and the details that concern participants. Coding sheets will be used to better organize and group patterns and responses received by participants. Anonymity will be provided to all participants so that they are allowed to speak freely and privately. After signing consent forms participants will begin to answer questions and provide oral histories on their lived experiences relative to the subject. Participants will not have names publicly revealed nor personal information that they wish not to be shared included within the study. To recruit participants, the researcher will reach out to local communities, close connections and local networks that have many ideal candidates for the study. Every participant or potential participant will be aware of their position in the study and what the data collected from them is being used for. They will be aware of their contribution to the study of the consequences from the Banana Wars in Honduras. The interviews will last anywhere between 30 minutes to an hour for each participant. There will be open-ended questions being asked such as "How did your family's living conditions change after the Banana Wars?" and "What do you remember about the banana companies or U.S presence during that time?" Follow up questions will be asked to get more in depth answers and later create a strong claim to support the study.
Data management is imperative for studies such as these, therefore the researcher will manage by organizing data collected in specific themed folders and confidential spaces. That will group data based on similarities and connections. Transcripts of the conservations will be made and conserved to look back on when putting together conclusions. Data will be stored securely behind devices that require a password and no participant's personally identifying details will be included within the containment of the data. These tools and procedures are the most ideal for this study because they capture detailed stories and lived experiences tied to the social consequences of the Banana Wars. That archival research could not provide alone. This expands the view and scope of the social elements within that event that we currently have. Oral histories are crucial for covering a subject that has such a limited scope of information and media coverage on. Especially in view of the fact that the sources available are scarce and cover only political and economic ranges. After completing transcripts of the interviews, the information will be summarized and codes will be assigned to recurring ideas such as examples like "food and job insecurity", "food quality", "Impact on housing". Unique experiences and statements will be highlighted as well as the patterns found in the shared data. There will be smaller specific themes then broader themes so that there are variations of the type of data provided.
With the quantitative method the amount of participants that mention certain subjects will be counted and recorded. As well as how many relate to a certain sentiment over others. Simple percentages and frequencies will be used to compare or show how common experiences are. This will represent patterns although keeping in mind the small sample size. By organizing the data and identifying recurring patterns, this study can provide an understanding of whether the Banana Wars affected local Honduran communities after the event, and in what ways. Simple counts assist readers to showcase patterns that don't neglect the lack of a large scale survey. Advanced statistics were not used due to the fact that the study is about the interpretation of lived experiences and not predictions/testing hypotheses.
After concluding the method section, the data will now be presented after being filtered through and categorized. Starting with the overview of the data, overall 30 people consented to participate in this study. All ranging from the ages of 37-60 years old. They are people who have lived or currently reside specifically in banana zone areas. Such as Trujillo, Tocoa, San Pedro Sula, La Ceiba or Tela. The type of data that was collected were 30 semi-structured oral histories. Responses were coded using open coding and axial coding which essentially means they were initially grouped in temporary categories such as the sizes of data given by the participants. Later themes were developed which assisted with the analysis at the end and deepens understanding for the reader.
A number of seven groups were concluded to have themes in common when it came to oral histories. Group One - Limited Memory, Infrastructure Recall. Group One had 12 participants who all similarly reported, "Remembering old railroads built throughout the country, United Fruit Company had workers who lived on compounds, but they don't recall many details about the Banana Wars themselves." Group Two - First Time Hearing About It. This group had 6 participants and they reported, "Never hearing about the Banana Wars, and recently learned online or through this study." Group Three - Underpaid, Overworked and No Unions. Group Three had 7 participants that recalled, "Describing banana workers as underpaid, overworked and lacking unions or protections. They noted that cities depended economically on banana exports." Group Four - "El Pulpo". Group Four had 8 participants that reported, "United Fruit was remembered as El Pulpo, a company with so much power that its tentacles were everywhere in Honduras." El Pulpo translates to The Octopus. Group Five - Poor Housing, Losing land, Private Army. Group Five consisted of 9 participants who reported, "Workers lost land or were displaced, lived in poor company housing, were paid in vouchers and were constantly on edge due to their company having a private army on the fields." Group Six - Corruption and Local Power. Group Six consisted of 7 participants which all reported, "Linking United Fruit's money and power to local corruption and political influence in neighborhoods." Group Seven - Dependence on Bananas and Vouchers. Group Seven had 8 participants who all reported, "Nearly all local jobs were tied to bananas, and workers had to buy food and goods in company owned stores due to the fact that they got paid through company vouchers and not currency."
Table 1 represents which ones were the most common themes. Such as Groups Four, Five and Seven which together account for over half of the participants.
In Bar Chart 1 the bar highlights the key themes between Land Loss (30%), Company Control (27%), Economy and Voucher use (27%). This reveals how material insecurity and corporate control were one of the most mentioned subjects during the interviews. They are the majority consequence of the Banana Wars, therefore suggesting that everyday life and economic dependence are central to how the Banana Wars were remembered. More brief grouping patterns that were created were Theme 1 - Economic dependence and loss of autonomy, Theme 2 - Harsh living and working conditions, Theme 3 - Company control, Theme 4 - Political Corruption. Groups One, Three and Seven fit into Theme 1, they together are almost half of all the participants. They describe an economy where jobs and wages along with basic goods are all tied back to the U.S backed Banana companies. Group One was able to recall the railroads along with company housing, Group Three highlighted the lack of union and worker support/protections. Group Seven emphasized how workers were not even paid with currency but with vouchers that were only redeemable through company owned stores.
This pattern indicated that the Banana Wars reinforced a system where local communities could only depend on single export corporations, which limited their economic freedom. Participant 20 stated, "Ellos controlaban todo, hasta lo que uno comia." A statement that translates to, "They controlled everything, even what one ate." This further illustrates the idea that company control extended into daily life and consumption later shaping material life and personal agency. Theme 2 - Harsh living and working conditions, includes Group Five which had 9 participants (30%). They described overcrowded, low quality housing and physical risk due to the presence of guerrilla warfare and armed forces. Many reported that land was given up due to the companies increasing region takeover. Families were displaced to make room for more banana plantations. This suggests that the social consequences were not only economical but also physical, psychological and concerned about safety and community stability. Theme 3 - Company Control, had 8 participants including Groups Four and Six. These groups make up 27% that explicitly mentioned El Pulpo which is a nickname commonly known in Central America to represent the United Fruit Company. It is also used to describe the company's power and corruption over the regions. This stipulates that the Banana Wars are remembered as a time when a foreign owned controlled company could hold a great influence over land, labor and politics. Participant 1 stated, "En Honduras le dicen El Pulpo a United." Theme 4 - Political Corruption, had 6 participants, making up 20% of the participants. This includes Group Two, which admitted they had never heard of the Banana Wars before and learned either through seeing it on social media or through this interview after asking for context. This implies that public awareness of this time period is limited, and that many Hondurans don't recognize how past interventions have continued to shape the current social circumstances.
The Banana Wars had major effects and impacts on the life of local communities in Honduras. It caused people to lose their land, work in poor conditions. Become overly dependent on the foreign Banana company and it even led to corruption in local regions, making it harder to leave bad circumstances in that time period. While the Office of the Historian (1981-1993) showcases U.S actions as supporting stability, the oral histories show that local populations often perceive the presence of U.S backed forces serving more corporate interest than those of the people there. Taken together, this data implies that the Banana Wars left a social legacy of inequality and dependence on foreign controlled industries, which weakened protections and still shapes how the country runs today. A common counterargument made within this topic is that the Banana Wars was a way of protecting American economic interests and stability, while ignoring the exploitation that occurred during this time period. Others who support this view might also argue that the U.S being so involved in the trade helped keep it moving as well as protecting the banana company's interest and reducing conflict in those regions in the short term. However the interventions still strengthened foreign control over land and labor while ultimately affecting the ordinary people living in those communities.
This study is limited by the small sample size that was worked with (n=30). As well as limited communications due to distance and geographical differences, therefore the results cannot be generalized to all Hondurans of any parts of the country. The participant's memories and oral histories could be misremembered, exaggerated or influenced by time and family narratives. However, the depth of interviews makes up for this by sourcing a context rich insight into the Banana Wars specific to Honduran communities. The Banana Wars were an important part of Honduran history, in which the youth should consider it through a lived social experience and not just a distant diplomatic event. Recognizing this period in time can help better understand the patterns of inequality, corporate powers and land conflicts. There were also time constraints due to the AP Research Course only lasting a certain amount of time. Lastly the goal of this research was also to focus on the lived experiences of local Hondurans. More specifically changes in housing, access to food, healthcare, water and overall quality of life. Therefore this research does not cover all aspects of the war that affected the people such as, changes in government or international affairs and connections. Nor the aftermath of the war on the country's entire economy. The real world applications of this research is meant to advise others about the human rights concern, labor inequality and foreign economic influence through the lens of the Banana Wars in Central America, more specifically Honduras. This research provides an additional minor explanation as to the complex subject of why certain regions in the continent suffer with weak institutions and unfair labor conditions.
In conclusion, the personal understanding made with the new evidence that has been presented, is that local Hondurans during that time and on were tied to the overpowering banana companies in many ways than one. With that understanding moving forward the public should consider showcasing the voices of the people with these lived experiences and scars rather than only making conclusions and claims based on information provided by foreign companies, governments and media.
Works Cited
Absher, Samuel, et al. "The Consequences of CIA-Sponsored Regime Change in Latin America." Journal of Public Economics Plus, vol. 4, 12 Sept. 2023.
Barkham, Patrick. "The Banana Wars Explained." The Guardian, 5 Mar. 1999.
Bucheli, Marcelo. "Banana War Maneuvers." Harvard Business Review, Nov. 2005.
Cabal, Mariana Ramirez. "The Dark Side of Bananas: Imperialism, Non-State Actors, and Power." Harvard International Review, 9 June 2023.
Carroll, Rory. "History of US Interventions in Honduras." The Guardian, 27 Nov. 2009.
Crandall, Russell. America's Dirty Wars: Irregular Warfare from 1776 to the War on Terror. Cambridge University Press, 2014, pp. 109-260.
Crowe, Sarah, et al. "The Case Study Approach." BMC Medical Research Methodology, vol. 11, no. 100, 27 June 2011.
Kischbaum, Allison. "Banana Wars." VeteranLife, 16 Oct. 2025.
McGovern, Jim. "US Intervention Helped Destabilize Central America." Medium, 8 Aug. 2019.
Mehu, Mahalia. "Banana Wars and Global Battles." The Caribbean Since Columbus, CUNY Academic Commons, 30 June 2025.
"Monroe Doctrine (1823)." National Archives, 10 May 2022.
Office of the Historian. "Central America, 1981-1993." Milestones in the History of U.S. Foreign Relations, U.S. Department of State.
Oliver, Mark. "The Banana Wars: How the U.S. Plundered Central America on Behalf of Corporations." All That's Interesting, 14 Sept. 2017.
Stoyack, Aaron. "The Banana Wars: How the US Plundered Central America." The Collector, 5 May 2024.
