Is it important to be resilient in today's society?

3/21/23

Words:1800

Resilience is something mankind has always had and shown. And it's not only mankind that shows it, so

do most animals. Resilience is shown throughout history and is still being shown today. Things that

resilience most commonly appear in would be things like work, school, sports, daily life problems, etc.

This brings up the question: is it important to be resilient in today’s society where almost everything is

handed to you? “Brown rats in New York City may be evolving smaller rows of teeth. Tiny fish across the

Eastern US have adapted to thrive in polluted urban waters. Around the globe, living things are evolving

differently in cities than in the surrounding countryside. It’s happening in plants: White clover in

downtown Toronto is less likely than clover in surrounding rural areas to produce cyanide that deters

herbivores — a trend mirrored in cities in many countries, a new study finds. And it’s going on in birds:

Songbirds in Europe and owls in Argentina show evidence of natural selection in genes associated with

cognition.” (Bender 1). This direct quote tells us that it’s not just humans and animals that have resilience

but that plants also have a form of resilience to adapt and evolve. But this also informs us that you need to

have the will to keep moving forward to survive and adapt to your surroundings. If humans could learn

how to be as resilient as plants and animals we would have fewer problems as a whole. An example of

this would be that in sports if you get injured you have to be resilient and be patient and heal and once

that does you'll have to push through to get back to your old strength and to do that you have to be

resilient and if you're not you’ll most likely drop the sport. Resilience is also important for construction “

Some of these cultures you may have never heard of They live in the most remote places on earth, facing

environmental extremes like desert drought and frequent flooding a couple of years ago, I traveled to

northern India to a place overlooking the plains of Bangladesh where the Khasi people live in a forest that

receives more rainfall than anywhere else on earth and during the monsoon season, travel between

villages is cut off by these floods, which transforms this entire landscape from a forested canopy into an

isolated island. This hill tribe has evolved living root bridges that are created by guiding and growing tree

roots that you barely wrap your arm around through a carefully woven scaffolding multiple generations of

Khasi men and women and the children, they’ll take care of these roots as they grow to the other side of

the bank where they’re planted to make a structure that will get stronger with age.” (Watson 0:48-1:53)

This shows us what would happen when humans put their minds to something that they need to use. This

also tells us the most common time resilience is shown is when it's beneficial to people's daily lives and

helps them in some way.

From the two sources we have found out that resilience is most commonly found in things that are trying

to survive and adapt to their surroundings. Whether it be adapting to eating something new or building

something to help yourself and other people or producing less of something. All of these things took

resilience to complete. But this again brings us back to the question: is it important to be resilient in

today’s society where almost everything is handed to you? Before we conclude let's look at more

examples to come to a decision. “We live in challenging times with a heightened sense of uncertainty and

constant reminders of the unpredictability of what might be lurking around the corner; be it catastrophic

climate events, terrorist attacks, credit crunch, youth riots, or mass redundancies. For planners in the UK,

this wider sense of unease is exacerbated by a decade of constant change and perennial attacks on the

value of their professional contributions to society. Among the prescribed remedies for dealing with such

a state of flux, the one that is rapidly gaining currency is “resilience”. It appears that resilience is

replacing sustainability in everyday discourses in much the same way as the environment has been

subsumed in the hegemonic imperatives of climate change (Davoudi, Citation 2012). Yet, it is not quite

clear what resilience means, beyond the simple assumption that it is good to be resilient. Despite this lack

of clarity, there is a growing number of governmental and non-governmental reports which aim to

develop ready-made, off-the-shelf toolkits for resilience-building. One such report, supported by the

Department of Business and Innovation and Skills (BIS) considers “cross-dressing” as a way of building

community resilience (RRAC, Citation 2009, p. 10). These beg the following questions: Is resilience in

danger of becoming just another buzzword?” (Davou, Shaw, Haider, Quinlan, Peterson, Wilkinson,

Fünfgeld, McEvoy, Porter, Davoudi 1). This text tells us that there is a possibility that resilience may

become an empty word because it's replacing sustainability in everyday discourse. And if this were to

happen then we remotely wouldn't need it if that’s the case. “The concept of resilience has evolved

considerably since Holling's (1973) seminal paper. Different interpretations of what is nearby retail are

science, however, they are confusing. The resilience of a system needs to be considered in terms of the

attributes that govern the system's dynamics. Three related attributes of social-ecological systems (SESs)

determine their future trajectories: resilience, and adaptability. and transformability. Resilience (the

capacity of a system to absorb disturbance and reorganize while changing to still retain essentially the

same function, structure, identity, and feedback) has four components: latitude, resistance, precariousness,

and panarchy most readily portrayed using the metaphor of a stable landscape. Adaptability is the

capacity of actors in the system to influence resilience (in an SES, essentially to manage it). There are

four general ways in which this can be done, corresponding to the four aspects of resilience. (Walker,

Holling, Carpenter, Kinzig 1). This source counteracts the previous one by stating that the concept of

resilience has come a long way from where it started. If the concept has come a long way but the word is

losing meaning that could mean the word is being overused for the wrong situations.

“Resilience is widely seen as a desirable system property in environmental management…. the concept

of resilience to natural hazards, using weather-related hazards in coastal megacities as an example.” This

piece tells us that the most common use and need for resilience would be when natural disasters hit

communities. Psychological resilience is important in most situations but it's more effective “ in sports

because athletes must constantly withstand a wide range of pressures to attain and sustain high

performance. To advance psychologists’ understanding of this area, there exists an urgent need to develop

a sport-specific measure of resilience.”(Mustafa Sarkar, David Fletcher) This informs us that sports are

usually draining for the player so they have to be resilient and keep going and trying so they can get better

and better. “Individuals who experience loss of their physical abilities often face the challenges of

adapting to a new way of life. Past research has shown that sports participation can assist the physical and

psychological adaptation to acquired physical disabilities. The purposes of our study were to examine the

following: (a) the resilience process of sport participants with acquired spinal cord injury, and (b) the role

of sport participation in the resilience process. We conducted semistructured phenomenological interviews

with 12 male quadriplegic wheelchair rugby players. Results show that the development of resilience is a

multifactorial process involving pre-existing factors and pre-adversity experiences, disturbance/disturbing

emotions, various types and sources of social support, special opportunities, and experiences, various

behavioral and cognitive coping strategies, motivation to adapt to changes, and learned attributes or gains

from the resilience process. We discuss implications for future research and practice.”(Moe Machida,

Brandon Irwin, Deborah Feltz) This piece backs what was stated earlier about how people who play

sports need to be so resilient. Teachers tend to have more resilience when they are with a teacher that they

like having, teach them at school.”This paper draws on qualitative data from an Australian longitudinal

study begun in 1997 and completed in 2005. It identifies the ordinary, everyday, relational, ‘little things’

that teachers do to nurture and promote their students’ resilience at school. It briefly uses Giddens’

structuration theory to justify the study of micro-level relationships between teachers and students. It uses

the voices of students to show how everyday life at school is the source of significant

resilience-promoting influences. In doing so, this paper demonstrates why local activities and

relationships matter – because they have the potential to reinforce traditional school structures and

processes or to transform them to better support student resilience.”(Bruce Johnson) This helps prove that

the more teachers are friendly with students, the more they will have more successful classrooms.

“impacts of globalization processes on community resilience. It argues that theoretical concepts such as

transition theory can provide a lens through which resilience pathways at the community level can be

better understood, and proposes a framework focused on a social resilience approach for understanding

community resilience as the conceptual space at the intersection between economic, social, and

environmental capital. It argues that certain types of communities are losing resilience through increased

embeddedness into globalized pathways of decision-making, while other communities may be gaining

resilience, although not one system is either resilient or vulnerable. Striking the right ‘balance’ between

communities and their scalar interactions with the global level is key for maximization of community

resilience: while too much isolation of a community may be bad in light of over-dependency on local

resources, skills, and people, ‘over-globalization’, with possible loss of autonomy and identity, may be

equally fraught with problems. In particular, relocalized communities have, so far, not shown much

tangible success, as almost all members of the relocalization process at the community level are

simultaneously embedded within the global capitalist system through their dependencies on global

economic processes.``(Geoff A. Wilson) This article talks about the world's changing and so do

communities and these communities doing this show resilience.

These sources help us out and explain that we will need to be resilient our whole lives to keep progressing

as a person. They also shed light on some subjects that aren't talked about very often. Now we understand

that resilience is not something that most people nowadays don’t understand, that you will need to

progress as a person, and that it comes in more than one form for more than one reason. Thanks for

reading and I hope you will also show resilience in some way shape or form.

Work Cited

authors, A., &amp; Davoudi, S. (n.d.). Resilience: A bridging concept or a dead end? "reframing"
Resilience: Challenges for planning theory and practice interacting traps: Resilience assessment of a
pasture management system in northern Afghanistan Urban Resilience: What does it mean in planning
practice? resilience as a useful concept for climate change adaptation? the politics of resilience for
planning: A cautionary note. Taylor &amp; Francis. Retrieved March 16, 2023, from
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/14649357.2012.677124

Author links open overlay panel Geoff A. Wilson, AbstractThis article investigates the impacts of
globalization processes on community resilience. It argues that theoretical concepts such as transition
theory can provide a lens through which resilience pathways at the community level can be better
understood, Young, O. R., Winter, M., Smit, B., Rigg, J., North, P., Kelkar, U., Janssens, W., ‘Geels, F.,
Folke, C., DuPuis, E. M., Haan, J. D., Dahle, K., Cutter, S. L., Bodin, Ö., Bardhan, P., Bailey, I., Agrawal,
A., … Harvey, D. (2012, April 12). Community resilience, globalization, and transitional pathways of
decision-making. Geoforum. Retrieved March 16, 2023, from
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0016718512000681

How should we measure psychological resilience in sports performers? Taylor &amp; Francis. (n.d.).
Retrieved March 16, 2023, from https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/1091367X.2013.805141

Perspective resilience, adaptability, and transformability in ... - JSTOR. (n.d.). Retrieved March 14, 2023,
from https://www.jstor.org/stable/26267673

Resilient communities: Sustainabilities in transition. Taylor &amp; Francis. (n.d.). Retrieved March 16,
2023, from https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/13549839.2012.676637

Resilience in competitive athletes with spinal cord injury: The role of ... (n.d.). Retrieved March 16, 2023,
from https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/1049732313493673?journalCode=qhra

Resilience to natural hazards: How useful is this concept? Taylor & Francis. (n.d.). Retrieved March 13,
2023, from https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1016/j.hazards.2004.02.001

Teacher–student relationships which promote resilience at school: A micro-level analysis of Students'
views. Taylor &amp; Francis. (n.d.). Retrieved March 16, 2023, from
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/03069880802364528