Breaking Car Dependency: An Evaluation of Mass Passenger and Freight Transportations

Effectiveness in Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions

AP Seminar

May 1st, 2023

Word Count: 2173

According to a study authored by Professor James Hansen of Columbia University's

Earth Institute, and additional collaborators, published in the Proceedings of the National

Academy of Sciences, the average global surface temperature of the Earth has risen by

approximately 0.2 degrees Celsius per decade over the past thirty years (Hansen et al. 1). This

phenomenon is indicative of the broader impacts of global anthropogenic climate change as a

consequence of industrialization as greenhouse gas emissions have subsequently and

substantially increased. Such emissions then produce adverse climate effects as the United

Nations Climate Reports finds, “As greenhouse gas emissions blanket the Earth, they trap the

sun’s heat…Warmer temperatures over time are changing weather patterns and disrupting the

usual balance of nature,”(Causes and Effects of Climate Change 1). This disruptive and abjectly

harmful effect thus necessitates a significant response, especially within highly industrialized

nations such as the United States. Within U.S. cities the impacts of climate change are already

far-reaching as cities often serve as harbingers for the future effects of a warming climate, as Eric

Bender, former editor of the MIT Technology Review, writes in an article published in Knowable

Magazine, “Cities are kind of the key for understanding responses to global climate

change…This city is giving you the global climate warming that we would expect by 2050 or

2070 or 2100,” (Bender 2). Therefore, innovative solutions to the climate emergency fast

approaching the United States will be the cornerstone of humanity's adaptation and ability to

resist the threats of a changing climate. Moreover, within the United States explicitly, this burden

largely falls upon the transportation sector as it has consistently shown to be the highest emitting

segment of the economy. The United States Environmental Protection Agency’s Inventory of

U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks corroborates this, noting, “Transportation activities

accounted for 38.6 percent of U.S. CO2 emissions from fossil fuel combustion in 2021,”

(Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gases 43). Without action within this sector, the United States

will continue to face the detrimental effects of a warming climate, illustrating the necessity for

the implementation of adaptive technologies as a measure to prevent disaster. As a potential

solution to this complication stands the technologies of high-speed rail and electrified urban

buses. Each of these innovations in transportation has priorly seen prominence within both Asian

and European nations, but have thus remained unprecedented on a large scale within the United

States. Moreover, to reduce individual passenger travel, freight transportation emissions, and the

United States' reliance upon fossil fuels, the most optimal solution is a modal shift in passenger

and freight transportation to high-speed rail as well as an accompanying electrification of urban

commuter buses.

The most devastating subdivision of transportation in terms of raw greenhouse gas

emissions is derived from individual passenger vehicles. The Congressional Budget Office of the

United States corroborates this notion, writing that 58% of all carbon dioxide emissions in 2019

were generated solely by individual personal vehicles (Shirley and Gecan 15). Offering

governmental statistical analysis, this data reveals the severe detriment that car dependency

within America has generated. Additionally, this complication created by individual personal

vehicles exists as a consequence of the automobile industry as a whole, rather than specific

products or models, as Dr. Giulio Mattioli, a research fellow at the Department of Transportation

Planning of the University of Dortmund Germany, and colleagues confirmed in an article

published within Energy Research and Social Science, noting how the automobile industry is

incentivized to lobby to prevent legislation against environmental issues, thus making the current

industry unsustainable (Mattioli et al. 5). Offering a purely academic analysis, the perspective

proposed by Mattioli and his fellow researchers clearly outlines that the current state of

automobile-centric development continues to perpetrate environmental injustice, thus requiring

an adaptive modal shift towards more sustainable rail development. High-speed rail as a solution

to this complication created by automobiles has proven to be highly effective in achieving

greenhouse gas emission reductions by drawing substantial traffic away from individual vehicles.

This is verified by a study conducted by Meiyu Liu of Tsinghua University and additional

collaborators published within Public Library of Science One which noted, “HSR will reduce

carbon emissions by substituting highway passenger traffic, but the more significant the carbon

reduction effect of HSR is in cities with a higher volume of highway passenger traffic,” (M. Liu

et al. 12). The conclusions drawn from the academic perspective and literature of this study thus

illustrate the immense impact high-speed rail could have upon American cities as rail lines

siphon passengers away from personal vehicles. The findings established by Meiyu and her

colleagues are further supported by an article authored by Senior Policy Fellow Richard Nunno

of the Environmental and Energy Study Institute that reports that California’s current attempts at

constructing a high-speed rail line could reduce vehicles miles traveled by ten million miles per

day upon completion, saving approximately four-hundred billion vehicles miles over a fifty-eight

year period (Nunno). Both authors act in conjunction with one another's perspective to unveil the

degree to which high-speed rail would be exceptionally beneficial to the United States

transportation system. Furthermore, by investing in such transportation technologies, the United

States would be propelling its capability to reduce transportation emissions as reduced personal

vehicle travel will consequently decrease the most significant portion of transportation

emissions. An article authored by Yatang Lin, an assistant professor of Economics at Hong Kong

University of Science and Technology, and additional associates and published in Nature notes

that the construction of high-speed rail lines in China led to an annual reduction of about 11.183

million tons of carbon dioxide with great potential for significantly greater reductions provided

greener energy sources than those most prominently used in China (Lin et al. 1). Moreover, Lin

and her colleagues' findings illustrate the extent to which high-speed rail could impactfully

reduce the United States quantity of greenhouse gas emissions generated by transportation.

Furthermore, high-speed rail for passenger transportation could serve as a propellant to human

resistance against climate change while simultaneously improving America's ability to adapt

transportation modes to a heating globe.

Subsequent to the environmental degradation created by passenger transportation therein

lies the emissions created through freight transportation in the United States. Freight in the

United States is primarily transported via commercial trucking, as economist Andrew Hait and

supervisory statistician Lynda Lee, both of the American Census Bureau, write in a census

article, “Trucks transported 71.6%...of all goods shipped in the United States in 2017,” (Hait and

Lee). Both authors present a governmental and economic perspective on the issue of freight

transportation within the United States, and the data they unveil illustrates the extent to which

commercial trucking dominates the freight sector. Furthermore, this monopoly over the mode of

freight transit the trucking industry holds is extensively detrimental to the state of climate change

in America. Commercial trucking contributes immense quantities of carbon dioxide, as was

noted by Rui Jiang, a researcher at the Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, and several

colleagues in a study published in the International Journal of Environmental and Public Health

Research which found, “Freight transport…contribute[s] an average of…27.5% to total road

transport CO2 emissions,” (Jiang et al. 7) The data presented via Jiang and their colleagues thus

reveals how the data detailed by Hait and Lee causes excessive greenhouse gas emissions,

further indicating the need for a modal shift in freight transportation. High-speed rail has

additionally illustrated significant plausibility as both a reprieve to the trucking industry's

dominance of freight transit, but also as a solution to its immense carbon footprint. Rail

transportation of freight has previously been noted to be exceptionally beneficial in terms of

reducing carbon emissions, as was noted by Dr. Sakirdat Kaewunruen of the University of

Birmingham’s Department of Civil Engineering and several other contributors in a study

published in Frontiers In Built Environment which found, “Each tonne of freight moved by rail

reduces carbon emissions by 76% in comparison with road transport,” (Liu et al. 12). Moreover,

the academic perspective offered by the data represented in this study further indicates the

superlative environmental benefits high-speed rail would generate. Moreover, a further pivot

towards high-speed rail development rather than trucking infrastructure would serve to propel the

United States' ability to plausibly reduce its transportation greenhouse gas emissions. However,

the notion that high-speed rail and other advanced technological solutions to climate change are

the optimal solutions to these complications is heavily negated by The University of Colombia’s

Julia Watson, a leading expert in the field of indigenous nature-based technologies. In Watson’s

2020 Ted talk she notes how seemingly beneficial high-tech solutions to the issues generated by

climate change can often be more detrimental than more natural sustainable practices (Watson).

Therefore, the perspective offered by Watson directly contradicts that of Liu and represents a

potential complication high-speed rail may generate in preventing human adaptation to the rising

climate emergency. However, this notion is again directly contradicted by Professor of data

engineering Mathias Boehm of the Berlin Institute of Technology and several colleagues in a

study published in the European Transport Research Review which found that the replacement of

road transportation with a predominantly high-speed rail network of cargo transit could reduce

carbon emissions by seventy-nine percent (Boehm et al. 8). Moreover, the angle offered by this

data directly coordinates with that offered by Liu and their colleagues, revealing how a genuine

modal transition towards greater application of high-speed rail technologies for freight transport

would reprieve freight transportation emissions. Additionally, both studies unveil how

high-speed rail could thus bolster American cities' ability to combat the growing effects of

climate change, thus indicating its plausibility as an adaptive technological solution.

Accompanying the further promotion of high-speed rail as a technical solution to the

complications of climate change lies a pivot towards electrified urban buses as a further measure

to incentivize greener inner-city public transportation. Under the status quo, non-electric urban

buses not only stand as substantial polluters within inner-city traffic but also sabotage ambient

air quality with further detrimental effects on local environments. Associate Professor of public

health at Drexel University Gina Lovasi and additional collaborators confirm this notion within a

study published in the Journal of Exposure Science and Environmental Epidemiology which

purported, “emissions from diesel buses themselves can be a source of air pollution, including

nitrogen oxides and black carbon,” (Lovasi et al. 1). Through the simultaneously medical and

academic perspective offered by Lovasi and her colleagues, this study illustrates the necessity for

improvements within current public transportation modes to best combat pollutants and harmful

transportation emissions. Through the electrification of urban bus fleets, the United States would

be further propelling the resilience of American cities to the threats posed by climate change, as

electric buses generally result in less fuel consumption, and thus fewer emissions. An article

published in Transport Reviews Journal and authored by Dr. Katerina Deliali of the Department

of Transportation Planning and Engineering at the National Technical University of Athens, and

several additional collaborators corroborates this assertion, arguing that battery electric urban

buses always exhibited a fuel efficiency that was three times greater than that of diesel buses

while additionally maintaining zero tailpipe emissions (Deliali et al. 22). Deliali and her

co-authors' extensive experience explicitly within the field of transportation thus reveals the

genuinely positive effects electrification of urban buses could hold over United States

transportation networks. Moreover, the use of such adaptive technologies will require

significantly less energy generation than conventional buses, thus resulting in fewer carbon

emissions as a byproduct of the United States’s predominantly fossil fuel-based energy grids.

This phenomenon was reported by Dr. Adrian Todorut of the Technical University of

Cluj-Napoca and two colleagues in a study published in the Polish Journal of Environmental

Studies which noted, “The emission of CO2 generated by the production of electric power

consumed by electric buses is 2.605 times lower than that generated by diesel buses,” (Todorut et

al. 11). Todorut and his collaborators academic perspective thus coordinates with that offered by

Deliali to reveal the strong improvements in fuel efficiency that electric buses create. This is

indicative of the fact that electric buses could serve a strong role as a remedy for the

consequences of climate change within urban areas in conjunction with high-speed rail

technologies.

The effects of anthropogenic climate change are swiftly approaching, marking the

necessity for immediate action against its chief causes. Within the United States, the

transportation sector underpins the United States' failures to adequately combat this growing

threat. Thus, through the implementation of highly adaptive technologies such as high-speed rail

for both passenger and freight transportation as well as electrified urban buses for inner-city

transit, the United States would be propagating strengthened transportation networks that can

effectively reduce the immense burden of transportation emissions within America. Moreover,

by propelling and incentivizing such modes of transportation, the United States would be acting

in conjunction with much of the rest of the world in a coalition against the looming consequences

of mass and uninhibited industrialization.

Works Cited

Bender, Eric. “Urban Evolution: How Species Adapt to Survive in Cities.” Knowable Magazine,

2022, https://doi.org10.1146/knowable-031822-1. Accessed 9 Apr. 2023.

Boehm, Mathias et al. “The Potential of High-Speed Rail Freight in Europe: How Is a Modal

Shift from Road to Rail Possible for Low-Density High Value Cargo?” European

Transport Research Review, vol. 13, no. 1, 2021,

https://doi.org10.1186/s12544-020-00453-3. Accessed 9 Apr. 2023.

Deliali, Aikaterini et al. “Transitioning to Zero-Emission Bus Fleets: State of Practice of

Implementations in the United States.” Transport Reviews, vol. 41, no. 2, 2021, pp.

164–191, https://doi.org10.1080/01441647.2020.1800132. Accessed 9 Apr. 2023.

Hait, Andrew and Lynda Lee. “Most Goods Americans Use in Their Daily Lives Are

Transported and Delivered by Truck.” Census.gov, 2021,

https://www.census.gov/library/stories/2021/02/what-is-in-that-truck-i-just-passed-on-the

-highway.html. Accessed 9 Apr. 2023.

Hansen, James et al. “Global Temperature Change.” Proceedings of the National Academy of

Sciences of the United States of America, vol. 103, no. 39, 2006, pp. 14288–14293,

https://doi.org10.1073/pnas.0606291103. Accessed 9 Apr. 2023.

Jiang, Rui et al. “Driving Factors behind Energy-Related Carbon Emissions in the U.S. Road

Transport Sector: A Decomposition Analysis.” International Journal of Environmental

Research and Public Health, vol. 19, no. 4, 2022, p. 2321,

https://doi.org10.3390/ijerph19042321. Accessed 9 Apr. 2023.

Lin, Yatang et al. “Impact of High-Speed Rail on Road Traffic and Greenhouse Gas Emissions.”

Nature Climate Change, vol. 11, no. 11, 2021, pp. 952–957,

https://doi.org10.1038/s41558-021-01190-8. Accessed 9 Apr. 2023.

Liu, Meiyu et al. “Revealing the Transmission Mechanism and Spatial Spillover of Carbon

Emission Reduction Caused by High-Speed Rail Opening.” PloS One, vol. 17, no. 8,

2022, p. e0271585, https://doi.org10.1371/journal.pone.0271585. Accessed 9 Apr. 2023.

Liu, Rucheng et al. “Sensitivity of a High-Speed Rail Development on Supply Chain and

Logistics via Air-Rail-Road Freight Transportation.” Frontiers in Built Environment, vol.

7, 2021, https://doi.org10.3389/fbuil.2021.685884. Accessed 9 Apr. 2023.

Lovasi, Gina et al. “Clean Fleets, Different Streets: Evaluating the Effect of New York City’s

Clean Bus Program on Changes to Estimated Ambient Air Pollution.” Journal of

Exposure Science & Environmental Epidemiology, 2022,

https://doi.org10.1038/s41370-022-00454-5. Accessed 9 Apr. 2023.

Mattioli, Giulio et al. “The Political Economy of Car Dependence: A Systems of Provision

Approach.” Energy Research & Social Science, vol. 66, no. 101486, 2020, p. 101486,

https://doi.org10.1016/j.erss.2020.101486. Accessed 9 Apr. 2023.

Nunno, Richard. “Fact Sheet | High Speed Rail Development Worldwide.” Environmental and

Energy Study Institute, 19 July 2018,

https://www.eesi.org/papers/view/fact-sheet-high-speed-rail-development-worldwide.

Accessed 9 Apr. 2023.

Shirley, Chad and Ron Gecan. “Emissions of Carbon Dioxide in the Transportation Sector.”

Congressional Budget Office, 13 Dec. 2022, https://www.cbo.gov/publication/58861.

Accessed 9 Apr. 2023.

Todoruț, Adrian et al. “Replacing Diesel Buses with Electric Buses for Sustainable Public

Transportation and Reduction of CO2 Emissions.” Polish Journal of Environmental

Studies, vol. 29, no. 5, 2020, pp. 3339–3351, https://doi.org10.15244/pjoes/112899.

Accessed 9 Apr. 2023.

United Nations. “Causes and Effects of Climate Change.”

https://www.un.org/en/climatechange/science/causes-effects-climate-change. Accessed 9

Apr. 2023.

United States of America, Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Atmospheric Protection.

“Draft Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks.” Environmental

Protection Agency, 2023,

https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2023-02/US-GHG-Inventory-2023-Main-Te

xt.pdf. Accessed 9 Apr. 2023.

Watson, Julia. “How to Build a Resilient Future Using Ancient Wisdom.” Ted.com, 11 Aug.

2020.

https://www.ted.com/talks/julia_watson_how_to_build_a_resilient_future_using_ancient

_wisdom. Accessed 9 Apr. 2023.