Mental Health Issues in the United States Military

Word Count: 1,823

Abstract

This paper addresses the issue of declining mental health in the United States military.

The proposed solution is to bring awareness to the topic and break the negative stigma around

getting help for your mental health in the military. These issues will be discussed through the

psychological effects of poor mental health because of serving in the military, the past political

solutions that have failed, and the possible economic solutions. The idea for this paper was

inspired by the given stimulus sources. Both “The Dark Side of Resilience” and “In Their Own

Words: resilience Among Haitian Survivors of the 2010 Earthquake” will be utilized. This paper

was formulated through a plethora of research, in an attempt to find a solution to the decrease in

mental state from serving in the military.

Introduction

Mental illness is one of the most prevalent issues for people who serve in the military,

and more efficient ways to reduce these problems need to be put in place. With “nearly 1 in 4

active-duty members showing signs of a mental health condition,” there is a clear issue with how

the mental illnesses are being caught, and how they are being treated once found (NAMI, n.d.).

The stimulus material “In Their Own Words: Resilience Among Haitian Survivors of the 2010

Earthquake” inspired the thought process that led to the topic of bettering mental health care for

people in the military, since it explains trauma, and trauma is extremely common in the military.

The stimulus “The Dark Side of Resilience” further supported the topic by explaining how the

U.S. Marine Corps utilizes resilience in their training, and how it might be more harmful than

helpful. While there have been many efforts to lower the severity of mental illnesses through

programs, most have not been successful, since mental illness rates in the military are not

significantly decreasing.  Mental illness needs to be caught and treated in the military quicker

and more efficiently.

Psychological Effects of the Military

Serving in the military is one of the harshest environments to work in and constantly be

surrounded by. Between the intense training programs and the dangerous deployments, being in

the military has mentally draining effects. Most mental issues in the military stem from trauma.

“Trauma comes from the Greek word for ‘wound.’ Trauma refers to either physical or to

psychological, life-threatening injury resulting from catastrophic personal, familial, or disaster

experiences, from which the individual or community cannot escape, but to which the reaction is

one of terror, helplessness, and a sense of being overwhelmed” (“In Their Own Words: resilience

Among Haitian Survivors of the 2010 Earthquake”). While serving in all branches of the military

is challenging, the Army and the Marines have the most extreme conditions, causing them to also

face the most severe mental effects. In the Marine Corps, “service members may begin drinking

during active duty due to stress, lack of other activities to participate in, isolation, and as a way

to bond with other service members. However, this can become an unhealthy pattern that persists

even after active duty has been completed” (AAC, 2022). While trying to find a way to deal with

the conditions of the Marine Corps, the members drink, which in some cases leads to addiction,

one of the many psychological disorders that come from the military. Other most often seen

mental illnesses in the military are Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD), depression, and

anxiety. These also have negative effects on not only the person struggling with them, but their

friends and family as well. PTSD often stems from “traumatic events, such as military combat”,

especially when deployed or in active duty (NAMI, n.d.). This combat is inevitable when serving

in the military, but the symptoms from it are very serious and could harm the person diagnosed

with PTSD. “Some symptoms of PTSD include having nightmares or feeling like you are

reliving the event, avoiding situations that remind you of the event, being easily startled, and loss

of interest in activities,” which could make an uncomfortable life for anyone with PTSD (VA,

2007). This could result in lack of sleep because of nightmares, and constantly being on edge

from reminders of events in the past. PTSD also leads to depression and could worsen or bring

on new addictions, which deteriorates mental health.

Programs in Place to Treat Military Mental Illness

While there are many severe mental illnesses that result from being in the military,

programs have been established to bring awareness to and treat them. The most well-known of

the programs is the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, or the VA. This is a government

program that provides not only mental health care, but educational and financial benefits too.

This program has many perks, such as providing access to “mental health services for

posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), psychological effects of military sexual trauma (MST),

depression, grief, anxiety, and other needs” (VA, 2023). These programs come in many forms,

with counselling and therapy treatments, and both in person and online options. This diverse

range of options is an effort to expand their treatment options to as many people as possible, but

mental illness rates in the military are still not declining. Regarding the fact that “substance

abuse and mental health challenges are disproportionately common in the Marine Corps and

Army when compared to the other military services,” some programs were created to

accommodate to only certain branches of the military (Myers, 2022). For instance, the

Psychological Health Outreach program was created in order to help the Marines, since they

have such an overwhelming amount of mental illness compared to the other U.S. military

branches. They are “an all encompassing program dedicated to providing Reservists full access

to appropriate psychological health care services, increasing resiliency, and facilitating recovery,

which is essential to maintaining a ready military force” (U.S. Marine Corps Forces Reserve,

n.d.). This type of program is ideal, since they are only for one military branch, which allows

them to accommodate to the specific illnesses and situations that come with that specific branch.

All of their services are free and confidential, which is another thing that makes this style of

program so perfect to treat the illnesses, but like the VA, the Psychological Health Outreach

program requires the patient or their family members to reach out to the program and ask for

help. This often outweighs all of the positives that these programs have to offer, and discourages

people from getting help, since they are too scared to reach out themselves and ask for help,

which is why the mental illness rates are still so high in the U.S. military.

Social Issues with the Current Programs

Even though the current programs seem to be perfect to solve the problem of rising

mental illness rates in the military, they all have one thing in common: the patient must be the

one to reach out to the programs. This is a major issue for many people, due to the social notions

surrounding reaching out for help. Many people do not want to be the ones to reach out since

there is such a negative stigma surrounding doing so, with a stigma being “a strong feeling of

disapproval that most people in a society have about something, especially when this is unfair”

(Cambridge Dictionary, 2023). Within the military, stigmas are stopping people from getting the

mental health care they need. “Military culture values teamwork, toughness, and self-reliance. In

some situations, these same values may serve to promote stigma. For example, military

personnel may be concerned that seeking care will hinder their effectiveness and possibly limit

their military career” (AAC,2022). Out of fear of these things actually happening, people serving

in the military choose not to get mental health help, even if they need it. This is the main reason

the current programs are failing. Not because they are not efficiently created and thought

through, but because people are too scared to reach out to get help.

Breaking the Stigma

With a stigma being something set into the minds of society, it would be extremely

difficult to change the way everyone views mental health issues in the military. However, some

of these stigmas are being put out from the military themselves, instead of society deciding this

as a whole. While trying to promote resilience in the military, a negative stigma surrounding

having mental health issues has been spread. “The United States Marine Corps uses the ‘pain is

just weakness leaving the body’ mantra as a part of their hardcore training program” (“The Dark

Side of Resilience”). If we start to change the way the military approaches encouraging

resilience, we could eliminate some stigmas from the military. Changing the ‘mantra,’ like the

one the Marines use, could decrease the feeling that you cannot get mental help while in the

military, and would increase the use of the current programs to help treat mental health issues.

Discouraging this type of negative association to mental illness in the military could quickly

change the way society and the soldiers serving in the military view accepting their mental

illness and receiving treatment.

Solution

The most efficient way to decrease the mental illness rates in the military is to bring

awareness to the issue at hand, and to break the negative stigma surrounding getting mental help.

The first step that needs to be taken is to change the way society has learned to view mental

health issues. This can be done by “educating military leadership, changing the culture of

seeking mental health care, and veteran-specific programmed aimed at decreasing stigma and

engaging veterans in care” (AAC, 2022). The stigma can also be changed by altering the way the

military themselves is advertising. Just simply changing the “mantra” of certain branches, like

the Marines, could help people have a more accepting outlook on having mental health issues.

By opening up peoples’ minds to accept the idea of everyone in the military not always being in

a perfect mental state, the people in the military who are struggling with mental illness will no

longer be afraid to get treatment, which will decrease military mental issue rates. We also need to

require some sort of mental health screening every couple of months. With PTSD branching

from traumatic events, screenings to make sure each recent event did not create a new mental

illness will help us catch the issue early on. If signs of PTSD are noticed during these screenings,

the symptoms will be able to be treated much earlier on, helping decrease the negative side

effects from the disorder. This will decrease the severity of the disorder, which could in turn stop

the PTSD from branching into other mental illnesses, like addiction and depression, as severe

PTSD often does.

Conclusion

Mental illness in the military is spiking, with more and more people reporting mental

illness from the military each day. PTSD, addiction, depression, and anxiety are sweeping

through the U.S. military, and causing many issues to the well-being of these people who suffer

with mental illnesses. With the symptoms getting worse during active-duty combat and

deployment, there needs to be programs to catch the illness early on so that it does not progress

into something even worse than it is. In order to make sure these programs are efficient,

however, the huge negative stigma surrounding getting mental health treatment while you are in

the military needs to be broken. By bringing awareness to the issues the stigma is causing and by

showing the benefits of the mental health treatments, more people will be open to reaching out

themselves to the programs and will reap the benefits of the current programs that are efficiently

created, such as the VA and the Psychological Health Outreach program.

References

Gielan, S. A. and M., Kopans, D., & Molinsky, A. (2021, September 17). The Dark Side of

Resilience. Harvard Business Review. Retrieved April 17, 2023, from

https://hbr.org/2017/08/the-dark-side-of-resilience

Home. U.S. Marine Corps Forces Reserve - Home. (n.d.). Retrieved April 17, 2023, from

https://www.marforres.marines.mil/Staff-Sections/Special-Staff/Health-Services-

Support/Psychological-Health-Outreach-Program/

Myers, M. (2022, August 19). Marine Corps, Army report disproportionate substance abuse,

mental health issues. Military Times. Retrieved February 19, 2023, from

https://www.militarytimes.com/news/pentagon-congress/2022/06/24/marine-corps-army-

have-disproportionate-amounts-of-substance-abuse-mental-health-

issues/#:~:text=%E2%80%9CAfter%20adjustment%2C%20service%20members%20in,jo

urnal%20Drug%20and%20Alcohol%20Dependence.

Nami Homefront. NAMI. (n.d.). Retrieved February 19, 2023, from

https://www.nami.org/Support-Education/Mental-Health-Education/NAMI-Homefront

Veterans & Active Duty. NAMI. (n.d.). Retrieved March 15, 2023, from

https://www.nami.org/Your-Journey/Veterans-Active-

Duty#:~:text=Nearly%201%20in%204%20active,the%20transition%20to%20civilian%20l

ife

Veterans & Active Duty. NAMI. (n.d.). Retrieved April 4, 2023, from

https://www.nami.org/Your-Journey/Veterans-Active-Duty

Va.gov: Veterans Affairs. Aging Veterans and Posttraumatic Stress Symptoms. (2007, January

1). Retrieved April 4, 2023, from

https://www.ptsd.va.gov/understand/what/aging_veterans.asp#:~:text=Many%20older%20

Veterans%20find%20they,loss%20of%20interest%20in%20activities

Va Mental Health Services. Veterans Affairs. (2023, January 11). Retrieved April 4, 2023, from

https://www.va.gov/health-care/health-needs-conditions/mental-health/

Military stigma: Substance abuse and mental health. American Addiction Centers. (2022,

December 15). Retrieved March 3, 2023, from

https://americanaddictioncenters.org/veterans/stigma-impacts

Rahill, G. J., Ganapati, N. E., Joshi, M., Bristol, B., Molé, A., Jean-Pierre, A., Dionne, A., &

Benavides, M. (2016). In their Own Words: Resilience among Haitian Survivors of the

2010 Earthquake. Journal of health care for the poor and underserved, 27(2), 580–603.

https://doi.org/10.1353/hpu.2016.0100

Stigma. STIGMA | definition in the Cambridge English Dictionary. (n.d.). Retrieved April 14,

2023, from https://dictionary.cambridge.org/us/dictionary/english/stigma

U.S. Marines Corps: Substance Abuse and mental illness among veterans. American Addiction

Centers. (2022, December 15). Retrieved February 19, 2023, from

https://americanaddictioncenters.org/veterans/substance-abuse-marines