Physical & Mental Courage: What’s the difference?

AP Seminar Student

Introduction

Did you know, you’ve been building courage your entire life, without even

realizing it? According to Sandstone Care, an organization dedicated to helping people

overcome trauma, says that childhood trauma is even more beneficial in building

courage that lasts your entire life. Yes, that time you broke your knee as a kid, that time

you were bullied, these examples of trauma all lead to two things, resilience and

courage. Both physical and mental trauma produce courage, but why? Which one is

better at doing so?

Physical Trauma and Physical Courage

Though difficult, the relationship between physical trauma and the ability to have

physical courage can be seen. As many people have come to find, traumatic events like

breaking your leg or having surgery can cause both courage and resilience, but why?

According to Chapter 3 of Trauma-Informed Care in Behavioral Health Services

published by the National Library of Medicine, the thing that varies between the same

traumatic injuries is the reaction. Even so, “The impact of trauma can be subtle,

insidious, or outright destructive”, it al; just depends on the response. If you choose to

let the broken leg disable you for the entire period of healing, you’ll lose out on both

learning what it’s like to deal with such an impactful injury as well as the potential

courage for further injuries that may come. Similarly, in paralytic injuries, most of the

ability to recover is owed to the courage the initial injury creates. Furthermore, in the

example provided in the stimulus material, “Through the Tunnel”, the young boy earned

an immense amount of courage from both the mental and physical trauma of swimming

through that tunnel. One can learn both from the courage to do such an act as well as

the courage earned afterward. However, one can also argue that these traumatic events

are more destructive than they are supportive. Unfortunately, yes, they can cause things

like PTSD, but this only proves that the long-term effects of trauma can also cause

long-term courage development. For example, according to Greater Good Magazine, a

magazine dedicated to building a better future for readers, previous traumatic events

can lead to “increased life satisfaction”. To do this, one must learn to overcome

adversity and work through intense psychological stress. This also illustrates why

physical trauma could be more courage-building than mental trauma, as physical

trauma requires both mental and physical endurance.

Mental Trauma and Mental Courage

On the other hand, there is mental trauma. A few examples are psychological

events like witnessing violence or losing a loved one. According to Sandstone Care,

there are also types of trauma, type 1 is an event at any point in life, and type 2 is

events that occur in the development phase of your life, which can have a more lifelong

effect. The effects of these events also vary, depending on the response. However,

common responses to events tend to be more evident. For many, it leads to depression

or other short-term effects, at least for type 1 events. Type 2 events could lead to PTSD,

long-term mental illness, and other effects that are a pain to deal with. Though this

could show that mental trauma is good at building courage, it also shows that events

like these are typically more destructive. Another downside of mental trauma is that in

many cases, benefits take any amount of time from hours to decades to be reaped. It all

depends on how the person goes about handling the trauma. Similarly, for outside

perspectives like therapists, it can be hard to find the issue at heart as the human mind

tends to hold back on exposing faults.

Conclusion

In essence, though both mental and physical courage are built throughout our

lives, physical trauma can benefit both the body and mind in building courage.

Works Cited

Quinn, Deborah, “Types of Trauma: The 7 Most Common Types & Their

Impacts”, Sandstone Care, https://www.sandstonecare.com/blog/types-of-trauma/

Lessing, Doris, “Through The Tunnel”, The Habit Of Loving, 1975, AP Seminar 2024

Stimulus Material

Graham, Linda, “How a Challenging Past Can Lead to a Happier Present”, Greater

Good Magazine, Feb 23, 2015,

https://greatergood.berkeley.edu/article/item/how_a_challenging_past_can_lead_to_a_h

appier_present

Center for Substance Abuse Treatment (US). Trauma-Informed Care in Behavioral

Health Services. Rockville (MD): Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services

Administration (US); 2014. (Treatment Improvement Protocol (TIP) Series, No. 57.)

Chapter 3, Understanding the Impact of Trauma. Available from:

https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK207191/