THE EFFECTS OF SOCIAL MEDIA ON STUDENT ATHLETES 1

The Effects of Pressure Related to Social media on the Mental health of Student Athletes

AP Seminar

April 2024

Word Count:1732

THE EFFECTS OF SOCIAL MEDIA ON STUDENT ATHLETES 2

The Effects of Pressure Related to Social media on the Mental health of Student Athletes

It comes as no surprise that the prevalence of social media usage over the past decade has

had many impacts on the lives of student athletes, both good and bad, but the pressures that are

related to social media usage are the most overlooked. Margot Putukian, the Chief Medical

Officer for Major League Soccer and Assistant Director of Medical Services at Princeton

University, found that “Global social media use rates have nearly tripled with 95% of

13–27-year-olds using YouTube and other platforms such as TikTok (67%), Instagram (62%) and

Snapchat (59%) and 35% of users doing so ‘almost constantly'”. Along with this, the American

Psychological Association has declared that the negative impacts that result from the use of

social media should be considered an urgent public health issue. However, social media has

become particularly popular amongst student athletes due to the benefits it provides to them.

Generally, social media allows people to gain opportunities worldwide and can provide a very

useful means of communication amongst athletes. Unfortunately, along with all these benefits,

athletes that use social media can be exposed to different forms of cyberbullying, including

body-shaming and the presentation of unrealistic body standards online (Putukian, 2024). The

reason why this pressure related to social media has taken such a toll on student athletes is

because there are limited opportunities for them to find support. This is because vulnerability in

the sports community has been stigmatized historically, due to the competitiveness of athletic

culture, along with the fact that emotions are generally seen as a sign of weakness. As of

recently, many sports medicine organizations, including the National Collegiate Athletics

Association (NCAA) and the International Olympic Committee (IOC) have begun to research the

importance of a student athlete’s mental health, trying to identify the causes of mental health

challenges in the sports community (Shewale, 2024). Although there is a lot of research that

THE EFFECTS OF SOCIAL MEDIA ON STUDENT ATHLETES 3

demonstrates the ways in which participating in sports has a positive impact on an athlete's

mental health, the NCAA does acknowledge that the athletic environment can simultaneously

exacerbate an athlete's mental health issues. Pressure related to social media can be caused by the

obligations faced by athletes to use or promote institutions on their social media pages, along

with the encouragement of social comparisons on social media, which may lead to an increase in

mental health disorders, or potentially act as a motivator in the sports community.

To begin, it is important to address why so many student athletes use social media, and

what it is primarily used for. Most athletes begin to interact with social media during the early

adolescent period, and once part of a high-level team, professional sports have agreements with

media press organizations. (Ng, 2024) At the high-school level there are usually no expectations

or obligations for athletes to interact with any media, however many coaches and recruiters look

for athletes who are more involved in this aspect. At the collegiate level, athletes are required to

represent their institutions through media appearances, however they require administrative

approval before speaking to journalists or making these appearances. In a 2020 study performed

by the University of Florida College of Journalism and Communications observed

student-athlete handbooks and found that “almost 58 of them explicitly forbade athletes from

speaking to journalists without permission from the athletic department” (Ng, 2024). Along with

this, many athletes use social media to promote their own personal brands or look for

opportunities to gain financial support, as social media is an ideal platform to promote their own

personal brands and acts as a means for athletes to communicate with and engage with their

consumers (Doyle, 2019). Some studies found that the encouragement of social media use

amongst athletes can allow for interaction with and discussion with fans, spectators and other

players. Along with this, social media is particularly beneficial to athletes in sports that are not

THE EFFECTS OF SOCIAL MEDIA ON STUDENT ATHLETES 4

widely broadcasted and need to be promoted through social media platforms in order to increase

the financial support and opportunities provided to them. (Ng, 2024) However, the benefits that

come with the use of social media amongst student athletes are limited, as it was found that

media exposure has been proven to have both positive and negative impacts on an athlete’s

performance. In a general public setting, the increase of social media use has caused a

proportional increase in rates of anxiety, depression, and other mental health disorders (Ng,

2024). To further exacerbate this problem, it was found that the years in which an athlete may

peak in their performance is also the period in their life when they are most susceptible to

developing a mental health disorder (Rice, 2016). In the end, however, it is the way in which

athletes may choose to cope with and address the stressors they face determines how their mental

health is impacted. Although there are some sport organizations that are trying to destigmatize

mental health disorders in student athlete groups, there are many that believe it is a sign of

weakness and downplay the importance of providing support to athletes on this subject.

With the increase of pressure on athletes to have and use social media, it is more common

than expected to see social comparisons happening between the athletes as a cause of it. Athletes

that use social media can be exposed to different forms of cyberbullying, particularly in the form

of body-shaming and unrealistic body standards being presented online. In fact, a study done on

adolescent German athletes found that a longer daily social media use led to an increased

negative mood, dysfunctional eating patterns and many other mental health symptoms.

(Putukian, 2024) In this particular case, the presence of social comparisons and societal

standards is what is causing athletes to have negative emotions related to social media usage.

Adolescent athletes must deal with pressures to perform well both in school and in their sport,

having to invest a lot of time and energy in training, recovery processes and competitions. Due to

THE EFFECTS OF SOCIAL MEDIA ON STUDENT ATHLETES 5

this, adolescents who are athletes have a higher risk of developing eating disorders than

non-athlete adolescents (Putukian, 2024). This is caused by the expectations placed upon athletes

to act and look a certain way. The presence of social comparisons may be attributed to the fact

that social media promotes unrealistic role models. This is also known as negative cognitive

appraisal of self, and it is particularly dangerous because it can lead to dissatisfaction and

depression (Fiedler, 2023). It is hard to limit the amount of social comparison on social media

due to the largely competitive nature of the athletic field, as there are always self-comparisons

and comparisons to other athletes being made. In fact, this is often encouraged by coaches and

peers as a method of improvement and growth, and acts as a form of self-motivation for student

athletes. However, a comparison to unattainable standards can mean a drastic increase of

pressure on a student athlete, even leading to strong negative emotions and the development of

low self-concept (Diel, 2021). Overall, these social comparisons are a relevant and urgent

problem to address as in the long run, the pressure being placed on student athletes comes from

the commentary and opinions of people online, which often lead to less vulnerability and

honesty, especially when it comes to asking for support and help with mental health struggles. In

modern day, there is a very unfiltered sports discourse environment on social media, as people

can comment on whatever they like. The use of social media is mainly driven by ego, and

comparisons between different athlete groups. Simone Biles is an example of the ways in which

pressure from social media may have tremendous impacts on a student athlete’s mental health,

and going against that ingrained media culture is seen as being both weak and emotional

(Thompson, 2021).

Despite this fact, social media has become a large part of the athlete community, and

there is a reason for that. Social media does benefit the athlete in some ways, including through

THE EFFECTS OF SOCIAL MEDIA ON STUDENT ATHLETES 6

increasing popularity and therefore funding for the athlete. Along with this, social media can

encourage team communication and relationship building. Many social media apps are used as a

way to create meaningful conversation between athletes, their teams and their opponents. Many

athletes do use social media to promote non-profit organizations and to advocate for social

justice (Merrill, 2023). However, there are many ways in which media training can be

incorporated into the lives of student athletes in order to develop healthy social media interaction

habits. As of current, many student athletes see opponents being portrayed on social media, or

are compared to them and their sports performances, which was found to act as an external

motivational factor and influences athletes goal setting and self-efficacy. Social media usage was

also found to decrease athletes’ cognitive loads, and allow them to better regulate their fatigue

and emotions (Sakalidis, 2022). In order to continue to improve, athletes must make constant

adjustments to their training and skill levels to match those of their competitive counterparts,

which leads to the encouragement of social comparison, both in real life and on social media.

Results showed that social comparison was found to lead to motivation in student athletes should

the comparison standard be moderate as opposed to extreme. Essentially, the most significant

part is whether the person they are comparing themselves to creates an unattainable standard for

them (Diel, 2021). The criticism and abuse that can be found online, along with the pressure that

comes with social comparison can work against athletes to undermine their self-esteem and in

turn decrease their athletic performance. It is important to address this problem through an

educational standpoint, providing in depth explanations and methods to prevent further mental

health disorders from arising due to social media usage (Meggs, 2021). These educational

programs would help limit the effects of negative comments on social media and increase the

self-empowerment skills that athletes have. The most effective way in which this

THE EFFECTS OF SOCIAL MEDIA ON STUDENT ATHLETES 7

training/educating can be integrated is directly through sports clubs and programs. Having

personalized help for a specific target problem can help mitigate any negative impacts of social

media pressures on both mental health and sports performance. There is no question that the

pressures of social media on student athletes have many impacts on them, both good and bad, so

it is important to address possible solutions and limitations to help mitigate those impacts.

THE EFFECTS OF SOCIAL MEDIA ON STUDENT ATHLETES 8

Works Cited

Diel, K. (2021). Motivational and emotional effects of social comparison in sports. Psychology

of Sport and Exercise, 57. 10.1016/j.psychsport.2021.102048

Doyle, J. P. (2020). Athlete branding via social media: examining the factors influencing

consumer engagement on Instagram. European Sport Management Quarterly, 22(4).

10.1080/16184742.2020.1806897

Fiedler, R. (2023). Digital media and mental health in adolescent athletes. Psychology of Sport

and Exercise, 67. 10.1016/j.psychsport.2023.102421

Meggs, J. (2021). Applying cognitive analytic theory to understand the abuse of athletes on

Twitter. Managing Sport and Leisure, 29(1). 10.1080/23750472.2021.2004210

Putukian, M. (2024). Social media impact on athlete mental health: #RealityCheck. British

Journal of Sports Medicine, 0. 10.1136/bjsports-2023-107651

Rice, S. M. (2016). The Mental Health of Elite Athletes: A Narrative Systematic Review. Sports

Medicine, 46(9). 10.1007/s40279-016-0492-2

Sakalidis, K. E. (2022). The Role of the Social Environment in Pacing and Sports Performance:

A Narrative Review from a Self-Regulatory Perspective. International Journal of

Environmental Research and Public Health, 19(23). 10.3390/ijerph192316131

Shewale, R. (2024, March 4). Social Media Users 2024 (Global Data & Statistics). DemandSage.

Retrieved April 22, 2024, from https://www.demandsage.com/social-media-users/

Thomas, T., & Chaleff, I. (2017). Moral Courage and Intelligent Disobedience. Interagency

Journal, 8(1). The Simons Center.

https://thesimonscenter.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/03/IAJ-8-1-Winter2017-pg58-66.pd

f

THE EFFECTS OF SOCIAL MEDIA ON STUDENT ATHLETES 9

Thompson II, M. (2021, July 27). Simone Biles and the most human meaning of courage:

Thompson. The Athletic.

https://theathletic.com/2735178/2021/07/28/simone-biles-2021-olympics-courage-mental

-health/