Running Head: FREE-SOLO CLIMBING: MENTAL BENEFITS

The Mental Benefits of Free-Solo Climbing

AP Seminar

30 April 2024

Word Count: 2198

FREE-SOLO CLIMBING: MENTAL BENEFITS

Free-soloing is the art of climbing mountains without a safety rope. It is a dangerous

sport that is physically and mentally demanding. Catherine Palmer, (2002) identifies the

mortality rate of free-soloing as “between 1 in 5 to 1 in 10 deaths for every success.” So why do

it? It is seen as the peak of climbing accomplishments, but are the risks justified? Reinhold

Messner, a free-solo climber, explains, “Maybe half of the leading solo climbers of all times died

in the mountains” which “is tragic and difficult to defend.” The philosophy, he argues, is when

“going in an adventure, you need difficulties. You need danger. If death was not a possibility,

coming out would be nothing.” (Mortimer & Rosen, 2021). However, free-soloing is a

controversy among not only the climbing community, but among inexperienced observers of the

sport. Falling and dying is the main concern revolving around free-soloing since the effects can

spread beyond the loss of the climber. Family and friends are left to grieve the seemingly

preventable loss. Palmer writes an account about Alison Hargreaves, a climber who died in 1998

while descending from a successful solo ascent of Mount Everest. “As a mother of two,

Hargreaves had effectively abandoned her children by taking such extraordinary risks.” Hence,

“Hargreaves ensured she would never dramatically, if fatally, distinguish herself from the crowd

as a climber, but rather as an errant, unthinking mother” (Palmer, 2002). While these losses are

tragic, it is ultimately the climber’s decision as to whether or not to climb. The call to the

mountain is obviously strong enough to keep them climbing, despite the risk and overwhelming

possibility of death. This extreme form of climbing embodies the human passion for pushing the

limits of what is possible in order to explore the unknown. Doris Lessing’s short story “Through

the Tunnel” from The Habit of Loving, (1957) captures this passion to explore through the story

of Jerry, a young boy working towards the goal of exploring a mysterious tunnel underwater.

Lessing emphasizes the need that Jerry feels to explore the tunnel, writing, “He knew he must

FREE-SOLO CLIMBING: MENTAL BENEFITS

find his way through that cave, or hole, or tunnel, and out the other side” (Lessing, 1957). By

listing the possibilities of what the tunnel could be: a “cave, or hole, or tunnel” Lessing

effectively shows that the tunnel is an intriguing mystery, and that Jerry is intent on exploring

this unknown natural phenomenon—much like how solo climbers go out to explore and climb

mountains—despite the dangers. Furthermore, the excerpt: “he would do it. He would do it if it

killed him” (Lessing, 1957) reflects the nature of solo climbing: climbing despite the looming

threat of death. This determination to explore the unknown, to climb mountains solo, despite the

dangers, provokes the question: To what extent is free-soloing mentally beneficial to climbers,

and are the risks worth the reward of accomplishment? When examining the proven mental

benefits of challenge and risk in other activities, and accounting for the fact that sometimes

genuine experiences need the threat of death to produce genuine results, it becomes clear that

soloing, though controversial, has a definite answer. While free-soloing is extremely dangerous,

it is also extremely mentally beneficial and is worth all the risks that come with the endeavor.

First, however, the obvious issue needs to be addressed: the dangers of climbing.

Mountain climbing in general is already established as dangerous; avalanches can occur at any

time, without warning, and even climbing with a rope can pose severe injuries from a fall. Audun

Hetland and Joar Vittersø, (2012) assert that “high altitude mountain climbing is associated with

a significant mortality rate.” Furthermore, Rodrigo Granzotto Peron, (2009) explains, the world’s

second highest mountain, K2, “is also one of the most dangerous, with a fatality rate of nearly

21%.” (as cited in Hetland & Vittersø, 2012). With such a high death rate, it is no wonder many

people oppose the idea of free-soloing. In addition to the death rate, the reason for climbing is

often frowned upon, due to misunderstanding. The majority of people, usually those who are not

accustomed to climbing, deem free-soloing as ‘crazy’ or ‘reckless,’ something only an adrenaline

FREE-SOLO CLIMBING: MENTAL BENEFITS

junkie would partake in. On the contrary, the motive for climbing is usually deliberate, rather

than impulsive and thrill-seeking. Marvin Zuckerman and Michael Kuhlman, (2000) define

impulsivity as “the tendency to enter into situations, or rapidly respond to cues for potential

reward, without much planning or deliberation and without consideration of potential

punishment” (as cited in Llewellyn, 2008). Free-soloing, however, requires careful consideration

that is not found in impulsive behavior. Palmer acknowledges that “rock climbing require[s] a

certain level of technical skill to [be] perform[ed] safely, as well as an awareness of local

weather conditions” (Palmer, 2002). Thus, free-soloing has no room for impulsivity; there is too

much planning involved in ensuring a successful and safe climb for it to be performed on a

whim. Gino Steinmetz, Mara Assman, Jan Hubert and Dominik Saul, (2022) conducted a study

which presented similar results to Palmer’s acknowledgement. They discovered that

“conscientiousness is significantly higher in recreational climbers compared to regular athletes,”

which could be explained by the “potentially fatal” aspect of climbing. This conscientiousness

could “be lifesaving in certain situations,” due to the responsibility for one’s own safety.

Together, Steinmetz, Assman, Hubert, and Saul’s findings, and Palmer’s observation suggest that

free-soloing is a well thought out and carefully executed sport—not an impulsive one.

Climbers recognize the risk that comes with free-soloing. It is the reason they plan their

ascents so carefully, taking into account every possibility and being prepared to improvise on the

fly. In order to climb, however, they must first overcome the instinctual fear of climbing in order

to free-solo. In a study conducted by Zanette et al., (2019) birds were exposed to predators and

monitored for signs of PTSD. The exposed birds suffered from enduring effects on their

behavior, in particular, more “time spent ‘vigilant and immobile,’” which suggests that

frightening and traumatic experiences can cause fear paralysis. Free-soloing is no different when

FREE-SOLO CLIMBING: MENTAL BENEFITS

it comes to frightening and even traumatic experiences that could occur up on the mountain. A

slip, or even a single glance downwards has the potential to make a climber freeze in fear. Thus,

free-soloers must push through this primitive, instinctual fear paralysis to begin and continue to

climb. This mental strength to do so is crucial to ensure they can safely complete a climb without

freezing in a state of panic mid-way up the mountain. Marc-André Leclerc, a solo climber,

recounts moments of fear paralysis. He notes that when encountering a difficult situation, he has

to make the choice to either continue climbing, or “have a melt down” and freeze. “You gotta do

one or the other,” Leclerc adds, “And that process of evaluating the situation and then getting it

together and carrying on, it’s a challenge every time” (Mortimer & Rosen, 2021). Additionally,

there is a general conflict within climbers concerning whether or not to climb. Jon Hughes writes

about the mountaineer Kurt Diemberger’s conflicting emotions about climbing. “For this

Austrian climber the mountains are a source of joy but at the same time are loaded with risk and

with danger,” and, the emotional high gained from climbing is “offset by the ever-present threat

of the fall” (Hughes, 2010). Despite the risks, many free-solo climbers still climb, training

themselves to be prepared for all possible outcomes of the climb. Thus, climbers have accepted

the reality that death is an undeniable possibility, yet they still climb, further supporting the

theory that there are greater mental benefits to be gained from these climbs.

But what mental benefits are there to be gained? Everything about free-solo climbing is

meticulous and deliberate, but also nerve-racking and terrifying. So how could there be any

mental benefit that could result from this demanding and risky sport? Karen Ersche et al. (2005)

suggest that risk taking and “the motivation to take risks may result from the desire to seek

pleasure or relieve negative affect” (as cited in Llewellyn, 2008). Thus, there may be some

benefits—both mentally and emotionally—to engaging in risky activities, such as free-soloing.

FREE-SOLO CLIMBING: MENTAL BENEFITS

Additionally, simply being out in nature may have positive effects on climbers’ mental health.

Devin Goldsmith, (2021) reports, “Physical immersion in nature certainly plays a role in positive

mental health” and stresses that “nature is proven to be a therapeutic outlet,” typically more

effective than “standard counseling and medication” (Goldsmith, 2021). Free-soloing involves

intense and direct interactions within nature and fosters inner struggles of man vs. nature and

man vs. self, both of which promote personal and character growth. Furthermore, Hughes

explains, “An alternative way of understanding the act of climbing a mountain is to conceive of

it not as a means of 'defeating' or 'overcoming' nature but of re-engaging primally with life”

(Hughes, 2010). Goldsmith and Hughes’ observations suggest that simply engaging in the act of

climbing outdoors is mentally refreshing to climbers, especially in today’s modern society where

nature can be hard to come by. However, this explanation only accounts for the outdoor aspects

of free-soloing and not free-soloing itself. Katharina Luttenberger et al., (2015) conducted a

study examining how effective an indoor form of free-soloing, bouldering, was as a therapeutic

treatment for depression. They found a significant positive effect on patients’ measures of

depression, and determined that “therapeutic bouldering may offer an effective treatment for

depression.” After further examination, taking into account the “high concentration,” physical

fitness, coordination, and the engagement of “intense emotions,” as a result of climbing,

Luttenberger et al. concluded “it seems a logical development to use the positive aspects of

bouldering as a therapy for mental illnesses” (Luttenberger et al., 2015). Luttenberger et al.’s

findings suggest that climbing without a rope effectively stimulates dopamine within the brain on

smaller, shorter climbs, and point to longer, free-solo climbs yielding even more successful

results. The benefits of free-soloing do not stop there. Lawrence Hamilton writes about the

emotional benefits of free-soloing. “Climbing provides its practitioners with a wide variety of

FREE-SOLO CLIMBING: MENTAL BENEFITS

emotional and aesthetic rewards.” Every experience offered from the scenery, relationships with

friends, and the “mental and physical joys of exertion and challenge” can provide these rewards.

“Such personal rewards are unquestionably powerful and important motives for climbing”

(Hamilton, 1979). Emotional rewards, while some may argue are not as important or of the same

value as mental benefits, are still an important aspect of what is to be gained from free-soloing.

Emotions are typically one of the driving forces behind decisions, and could be a large part of the

reason to climb untethered.

If free-soloing were to become a normalized therapeutic method for coping with and

treating depression, along with other mental illnesses or struggles, it would mean the

normalization of free-soloing—and climbing—as a sport. Recently, climbing itself has gained

popularity, making its debut in the olympic games in 2020. Free-soloing, however, while

becoming publicized via documentaries such as Free Solo (2018) and The Alpinist (2021), is still

controversial and generally unknown. Different places around the world have different views and

levels of acceptance of free-soloing, and the reason for this is found in the high levels of risk of

free-soloing. For instance, Schoffl et al. (2010) examined European insurance policies for rock

climbing, and found that many “limit or exclude rock and ice climbing participation.” However,

they also found a British policy which provides “global coverage for different forms of

climbing.” Thus, the “popular public and professional” evaluation of the dangers of climbing

“may not be fully informed.” These conflicting views can easily be fixed with education and

research about free-soloing. Free-soloing, however, is not for everyone. The amount of

experience, strength, and knowledge that is required to embark on these climbs is not quickly nor

easily obtained. Therefore, publicizing free-soloing could unintentionally lead to inexperienced

climbers trying their hand at free-soloing, unaware of the prerequisites. Leclerc describes the

FREE-SOLO CLIMBING: MENTAL BENEFITS

challenges and dangers of climbing, and what needs to be taken into account in order to climb

safely. “You control what you’re doing, but you can’t control what the mountain’s doing,”

Leclerc says. “The mountains are alive all around you and you’re kind of at their mercy.”

Avalanches and seracs can collapse randomly. Climbers have to be capable of “read[ing] the

signals that the mountains are sending,” and take into account the weather conditions (Mortimer

& Rosen, 2021). These demanding and strict requirements limit the number of people capable of

climbing, thus limiting the number of people who can gain the mental rewards of free-soloing.

Free-soloing does indeed offer a variety of mental benefits from multiple different outlets

and aspects of climbing such as being out in nature, the concentration and conscientiousness

required to climb, and the satisfaction gained from completing a challenging goal. While

free-soloing is not for everyone, it should be continued to be pursued by ambitious and

experienced climbers who wish to discover what the world has to offer. Due to the small

community of free-solo climbers, not much pre-existing data is held regarding solo climbing.

Future research should be conducted in order to better understand the wide range of benefits

proposed in this essay when actually applied to solo climbing.

Word count: 2198

FREE-SOLO CLIMBING: MENTAL BENEFITS

Reference

Goldsmith, Devin. (2021). The Influence of Connectedness to Nature on the Benefits of Nature

Exposure. Muhlenberg College. https://jstor.org/stable/community.31081458

Hamilton, L. C. (1979). Modern American Rock Climbing: Some Aspects of Social Change. The

Pacific Sociological Review, 22(3), 285–308. https://doi.org/10.2307/1388760

Hetland, A., & Vittersø, J. (2012). The feelings of extreme risk: exploring emotional quality and

variability in skydiving and BASE jumping. Journal of Sport Behavior, 35(2), 154+.

https://link.gale.com/apps/doc/A289360115/AONE?u=char21995&sid=bookmark-AONE

&xid=d07b4cce

Hughes, J. (2010). The Exhilaration of Not Falling: Climbing, Mountains and

Self-Representation in Texts by Austrian Mountain Climbers. Austrian Studies, 18,

159–178. http://www.jstor.org/stable/41201237

Lessing, D. (1957). “Through the Tunnel.” In The Habit of Loving. Harper Collins.

Llewellyn, D. J. (2008). The Psychology of Risk Taking: Toward the Integration of Psychometric

and Neuropsychological Paradigms. The American Journal of Psychology, 121(3),

363–376. https://doi.org/10.2307/20445472

Luttenberger, K., Stelzer, E.-M., Forst, S., Schopper, M., Kornhuber, J., & Book, S. (2015).

Indoor rock climbing (bouldering) as a new treatment for depression: study design of a

waitlist-controlled randomized group pilot study and the first results. BMC Psychiatry,

15(1).

https://link.gale.com/apps/doc/A541407981/AONE?u=char21995&sid=bookmark-AON

E&xid=b2268cbf

Mortimer, P., & Rosen N. (Directors). (2021). The Alpinist [Film]. Universal Pictures.

FREE-SOLO CLIMBING: MENTAL BENEFITS

Palmer, C. (2002). 'Shit happens': the selling of risk in extreme sport. The Australian Journal of

Anthropology, 13(3), 323+.

https://link.gale.com/apps/doc/A95148966/AONE?u=char21995&sid=bookmark-AONE

&xid=4ba06924

Schoffl, V., Morrison, A., Schwarz, U., Schoffl, I., & Kupper, T. (2010). Evaluation of injury and

fatality risk in rock and ice climbing. Sports Medicine, 40(8), 657+.

https://link.gale.com/apps/doc/A232383116/AONE?u=char21995&sid=bookmark-AONE

&xid=60772f65

Steinmetz, G., Assman, M., Hubert, J., & Saul, D. (2022). Recreational climbers are more

conscientious than recreational athletes-a case control study. BMC Sports Science,

Medicine and Rehabilitation, 14(1), NA.

https://link.gale.com/apps/doc/A704994421/AONE?u=char21995&sid=bookmark-AON

E&xid=2dc6ed61

Zanette, L. Y., Hobbs, E. C., Witterick, L. E., MacDougall-Shackleton, S. A., & Clinchy, M.

(2019). Predator-induced Fear Causes PTSD-like Changes in the Brains and Behaviour of

Wild Animals. Scientific Reports, 9(1). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-47684-6