IWA: AP seminar
 (1721 words)

        Research question:

How to maintain a sense of stability and keep up in a world that's constantly evolving?

The world is always changing and adapting to trends, and inventions every day. There will

never be a time where things always stay the same. Fluctuations are part of life, and it is

necessary for us to grow as a society, but how do we maintain ourselves and hold on to our

comforts and habits when everything around is everything but? Here are three ways, for

example we could use nostalgia and all of its forms. There are three categories to nostalgia

known as personal, historical, and collective. To start with the first type, it's called

personal. This is known as one's own memories and how they can contribute to our

personalities and identity we resonate with. In the passage called Nostalgia from the

sources given, it states, “Anchoring our identity in something enduring helps us when all

that is solid seems to be melting into air. Everything changes, but we need a sense of

stability and predictability. When things change too fast, we lose our sense of control.”

Personal nostalgia allows you to dig deep within and remember your own story through the

history and evolving surroundings you went through. This can give you something to ground

yourself with, whether it's a good memory with a partner, or the first time you stepped foot

onto your future college campus. Any memory that brings happiness and comfort can help

you find balance and stability when feeling lost or as if you're being pulled through a time

that's going faster than you can react. This occurs very often, when things happen round a

person and move so fast that they don't have time to grasp and process what's really going

on. When this happens, it's known as “being left in the past” which isn't something that

positively affects one's personal growth. Grasping the best parts of life is what can keep us

going in times of struggle and when all feels lost. Next is historical nostalgia, this is

reminiscing about the past and what felt like “the good old days” or “way back when”. To

sum it up, nostalgia is something that can help one establish a sense of continuity in not

only the rapid pace of their life but their own personalities. These memories create a sense

of longing and a bittersweet feeling due to the realization that you can never go back to the

best time of your life, except you never realize how good you have it till it's gone.

Unfortunately, that's the case with many things today, there's so many new creations,

trends, and inventions now a days that it's easy to forget what the importance of

remembering our roots is. A fast pace of change in what we know as home or habit could

cause us to lose control of ourselves and the basis of what makes us, us. This changes the

entire foundation of who we are and what we have learned to rely on and be used to. All

these new things such as AI, social media, technology, etc... can blind us and feed into a

delusion world that only surrounds these new things.  What about books, Newpapers, and

playing football with kids outside? What happens to all the simple and sweet things of life

once we evolve into the debatable questions of what is “better” or considered more

“efficient”. An example could be a worker being laid off due to machines and technology

taking their place, how is it fair? Easy answer, it's not. It's unjust to forcefully change the

lives of workers and how they make the income to pay rent, mortgage, bills, and in most

cases feed their families and care for their needs. So, how can one keep up?  In the articles

written by Forbes it states, “How is it possible to maintain this when the necessary skills

for any given job will most likely change every 10 years or less? The race has become a

marathon, and your sneakers are bound to break every five miles. So, what do we do? We

adapt.” At the end of the quote, they mention an important thing to keep in mind, adapt.

Yes, it's true that workers shouldn't be fired for things they have no control over, but many

times we must think of things this way, “rejection is redirection”. Not to get confused, it

doesn't apply to everyone, but if you adapt and mold your life to the hand you've been given

you can preserve and maintain an even balance with your surroundings that keep changing

and evolving. THIS is how one can maintain their identity in a society where it's a trend to

constantly be immersed int he next trend and new thing, you must stay true to yourself and

know that if you maintain grit, have perseverance, and create a plan, almost anything can

be achievable.

History is a big part of how we can carry out a balanced life. Mnay cultures practice

traditional measures such as meditating, and something known as feng sheui. Meditation

is an extremely helpful way to take a moment and pause in an environment that may feel

hectic and overwhelming. The art of just sitting in silence and quieting your mind to focus

on nothing sounds simple but is quite challenging. Once a person is skilled and disciplined

enough to successfully mediate, it can change their who life. Life is tough and every

moment could be your last or could be a new opportunity.  This may sound quite intense

but it's the truth, you never know what's going to happen next and if you're not caught up

with the latest news you get left behind and its hard to come back from it. Meditating can

help you collect all your thoughts and create a space in your head that can be considered a

break from life or even the creation of your own world inside your head. It allows you to

analyze and organize your thoughts, feelings, emotions and thought process. A source

called ( finding-stability-in-meditation)mentions, “when we meditate, we come back to the

bare experiences of what is happening from moment to moment. This has a marvelous

freshness. It's an opportunity to take a rest from our obsessive habits and rigid

assumptions... thoughts and emotions can arise and dissolve without disturbing the

underlying stability”. This is just one of the many practices a person could use to find their

inner balance in a world that's constantly evolving.

You could always look at the changes and differences in what you know with what you will

become familiar with as a gift. Many times, we don’t know what we’ve got until tis stripped

away or we’re shown what we missed out on. Taking the opportunity to make something

out of what's new and fresh could very well change one's life for the best and uproot them

in the best way they could imagine. Stability isn't what always what's believed to be true,

the trye meaning is adapting and adjusting to a surrounding that's constantly evolving. An

example of this is explained in a source called (Meadow Report), “The paradox of stability

is that it comes from movement: constantly, continuously, and consciously adjusting to

what is evolving around us, rather than reacting to it.”.

A thought by many when wondering how to keep up with everyone else in society is, how do

I do it? Theres so many possibilities as to what we can do to stay relevant with all the new

trends and creations, the question is which ones are most effective. One way could be to

keep yourself educated by learning a new skill. As mentioned before, workers are being

laid off due to technology taking their place, so why don't you learn a skill that's timeless

and isnt able to be replaced by machines such as a doctor or a veterinarian? The list is

grand, but these are just a few examples of how to not lose yourself and your place in

society as a person when everything is being improved and unfortunately forgetting about

the foundation on which everything began with.  In the source called medium it says, “In

today’s world, skills are often the prerequisite to a beautiful career. Learning skills open

doors to new career opportunities that you may never have considered before.” A person

can find a sense of comfort and stability in knowing that they have a skill that's timeless

and could be used in society even when all is ever changing and evolving.

How can we remember the past when society's unwilling tries so hard to change and forget

it? Without trying, we have made so many advancements that we tend to overlook where

we began and the beginning of all the things we have worked so hard to improve and

reshape. Due to this is why people get sucked into a haze of confusion and instability. The

source, Māori Oral Narratives, Pakeha Written Texts, states, “The life of any good written

history in Western European culture may itself be only ten to 15 years before

its subject matter is liable to be reinterpreted by another generation of writers.

The life of an oral narrative may be much longer — generations — but all its

verifying details, its participants, and even its central mythic cell (its symbolic

intent, sometimes expressed through parable) may have been altered. It will

continue changing, and be changed, as surely as textual history.” It reveals how things

really are altered over time, and it goes to prove that we must try hard to maintain the

originality that makes the foundation of all things. Stability is not something to just look

over, its something to be lived, a way to think and carry out daily practices. Yes, it's difficult

keeping in alignment with everything around us that is new and unfamiliar, but if we

practice internal balance, we can achieve all the great things society is trying so hard for us

to be a part of.

6-ways-to-stay-relevant-in-a-rapidly-evolving-society-e2e225a0b956
Jun 18, 2020,Ojukwu Emmanuel

finding-stability-in-meditation ( charles hastings)

welcome-to-the-new-normal-seven-ways-to-improve-your-adaptability-in-an-ever-

changing-world(Jul 08, 2021,Brad Federman,)

how-to-find-stability-when-everything-is-changing  (June 19, 2020, Renée Fishman)

False Nostalgia (JOHAN NORBERG, JANUARY 2022)

Maori Oral Narratives, Pakeha Written Texts (New Zealand Journal of History, 38, 2 (2004)