AGE RESTRICTION ON CAFFEINE       1

The Scientific Lens of an Age Restriction on Caffeine

AP Seminar

January 27, 2023

Word Count: 1303

AGE RESTRICTION ON CAFFEINE                                                                                           2

Introduction

Caffeine originally became popular in America around 1773. It has remained a part of

many Americans’ diets. Nowadays, caffeine is a popular trend in children and adolescents, which

is an issue that is not often addressed as it should be. Scientifically speaking, caffeine causes

various amounts of health concerns for the typical child and teen. According to the University of

Michigan, “Caffeine can lead to dangerous abnormal heart rhythms or lead to neurologic

symptoms of hallucinations or seizures” (Joy, 2017). Health administrations are trying to raise

more awareness to this danger. There is currently no regulation on caffeine by the U.S Food and

Drug Administration, as they only do the bare minimum with their “recommendations”. With

their silence regarding the topic of caffeine, this problem will continue to progress. According to

the National Library of Medicine, "Over 75% of children and adolescents consume caffeine

regularly” (Temple, 2018). Many parents choose to ignore these dangerous health concerns put

out by doctors, which is the reason so many kids, including toddlers, are consuming caffeine

daily. This is an extremely important issue in the scientific community because various studies

have shown that caffeine in children is extremely harmful to their health. Due to the lack of

concern from parents and the FDA, and the overwhelming concern from health administration

about caffeine consumption by children and teenagers, this forms the question: should there be

an age restriction on caffeine in the United States?

Scientific Lens: Health Administration

 Health administration is aware of the negative health effects associated with the use of

caffeine. According to the American Academy of Pediatrics, “At this time, pediatricians advise

against caffeine for children under 12 and against any use of energy drinks for all children and

teens” (AACAP, 2020). Only doctors have addressed the issue, as they directly see what caffeine

AGE RESTRICTION ON CAFFEINE                                                                                           3

does to children, they even highlight the problem that is energy drinks. Caffeine is causing so

many health problems, and it is clear that caffeine is dangerous to children, yet it can still be

accessed extremely easily. According to an article from Health US News, Jill Castle, a registered

dietitian and child nutrition expert, states “Caffeine is an easily obtained, socially acceptable

drug” (Castle, 2017). Most would not compare caffeine to something like drugs or alcohol. Yet

health administration sees the effects of caffeine in children, and claims it is a drug, that has

extremely harmful effects. This so-called drug, caffeine, is available to all ages despite the fact

that the effects are dangerous. Caffeine use can impact health, with effects ranging from a little

headache to death, when high doses are consumed. According to Columbia University Irving

Medical Center, “Caffeine has no nutritional value but plenty of side effects that negatively

impact health” (Buchholz, 2022). Health administration is puzzled at this fact because it is

pointless for children to consume caffeine. Even though people are informed that caffeine does

nothing to improve health, they continue to drink it and continue to harm their health. Children

are having issues such as heart problems, and it is often correlated to the amount of caffeine they

ingest. Caffeine is so dangerous, that it impedes normal functioning and development in a child.

The National Institute on Drug Abuse did a study that tested measures of cognitive functioning

in children that could possibly be linked with caffeine. This included vocabulary comprehension,

reading decoding, inhibitory control, working memory, episodic memory, cognitive flexibility,

and processing speed. According to this study done by the National Institute on Drug Abuse,

“The analyses demonstrated that greater caffeine consumption was associated with worse

performance on all seven cognitive measures assessed” (Perlman, 2021). This proves caffeine is

interfering with adolescents’ day to day life and posing an extreme threat to their health. All in

AGE RESTRICTION ON CAFFEINE                                                                                           4

all, the health administration gives clear warnings for children to avoid caffeine, which should

strictly be followed by all those who are affected.

Scientific Lens: Federal Agencies

 Americans rely on federal agencies, such as the U.S Food and Drug Administration. Even

the FDA is unsure of what the recommendation for caffeine should be for children and teenagers.

According to FDA, “The FDA has not set a level for children, but the American Academy of

Pediatrics discourages the consumption of caffeine and other stimulants by children and

adolescents” (FDA, 2018). The FDA focuses mainly on the effects of caffeine on adults, but they

cannot seem to address the issue with what caffeine does to children. The FDA ignores warnings

from health professionals that concern what caffeine does to a child. According to the FDA,

when asked how much caffeine a child can consume, it states “We recommend you consult with

your health care provider for advice regarding your child’s caffeine consumption” (FDA, 2018).

Once again, the FDA pushes concerns back over to health administration. This is because they

are unaware of the side effects that comes with it such as interfering with development, high

blood pressure, increase in heart rate, and more. The unawareness of the FDA proves Americans

cannot rely on this source. According to Diana Schnee, a registered dietitian at Cleveland Clinic,

“FDA doesn’t regulate the amount of caffeine in beverages, so you can’t always trust what you

see on the label” (Fennald, 2021). There is no regulation for caffeine in drinks by the FDA,

which is poses a risk on kids’ health. The FDA needs to step up in what they are doing to protect

children.

Scientific Lens: Parents

AGE RESTRICTION ON CAFFEINE                                                                                           5

 Most parents are not worried about their children consuming caffeine at a young age, but

parents need to be informed on the potential risks. According to the National Library of

Medicine, “Despite empirical evidence and high-profile news stories that suggest that high levels

of caffeine use can be harmful in children and adolescents, many parents remain unconcerned”

(Temple, 2018). Parents are unaware of this issue, even though health professionals are hounding

them to address it with their child. Caffeine is causing various issues in kids and teens, such as

insomnia, anxiety, chest pain, and much more. Many parents do not see an issue until it is too

late to stop the issue. According to another study done by the National Library of Medicine, a

parent claimed, “No one’s really overweight. So yeah, I think because they’re not overweight,

it’s not a concern” (Halberg et al., 2020). This proves how parents are ignoring this problem.

Parents believe the only concern is the child being overweight, but this is extremely incorrect.

Caffeine is so harmful that it is impairing a child’s cognitive functioning. According to a CNN

article, Mark Corkins, the division chief of pediatric gastroenterology and a professor of

pediatrics, stated that “And because parents perceive it as harmless –and it likely is in tiny

amounts –they will let their children take a sip or two” (LaMotte, 2022). Although a tiny sip may

be harmless to a child’s health, it starts small and then becomes an addiction, and at that point,

the child is consuming an absurd amount of caffeine. The parent perspective is like that of the

FDA, flags by health professionals have been made clear, yet they ignore them making them

extremely unaware of the real issue.

Conclusion

 The issue of caffeine in children continues to progress and negatively impact health, so

an age limit should be put in place to stop the issues with caffeine being available to kids at such

a young age. Even though FDA and parents may not realize the health effects caffeine has on

AGE RESTRICTION ON CAFFEINE                                                                                           6

children, it’s a prevalent issue that needs to be solved immediately. Health administrations notice

the dangerous impacts caffeine has on children, and they address it as a relevant and extremely

important problem. Each perspective is diverting responsibility, and the problem continues. It is

imperative that an age limit should be put in place to stop the problem of caffeine in children and

adolescents for the betterment of their health.

AGE RESTRICTION ON CAFFEINE                                                                                           7

Works Cited

Buchholz, D. (2022, August 3). Caffeine and Kids. Columbia University Irving Medical Center.

Caffeine and Children. (2020, July). American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry.

Castle, J. (2017, June 1). Caffeine: a Growing Problem for Children. Health US News.

Halberg, S., Lora, K., Sacheck, J., Sylvetsky, A., Turvey, C., Visek, A., & Weisenberg, J. (2020,

April 12). Parental Concerns about Child and Adolescent Caffeinated Sugar-Sweetened

Beverage Intake and Perceived Barriers to Reducing Consumption. National Library of

Medicine.

Joy, K. (2017, May 31). Parents, Perk Up to the Dangers of Caffeine for Teens. University of

Michigan Health.

LaMotte, S. (2022, October 14). It’s not OK to let kids drink coffee – so why do we do it? CNN

Health.

Perlman, W. (2021, April 19). Childhood Caffeine Exposure May Negatively Affect Cognitive

Functioning. National Institute on Drug Abuse.

Spilling the Beans: How Much Caffeine is Too Much? (2018, December 12). U.S Food and Drug

Administration

Temple, J. (2018, October 18). Trends, Safety, and Recommendations for Caffeine Use in

`Children and Adolescents. National Library of Medicine.

PT1-IRR D 1 of 6

Astrology and Its Effects on Religion

Currently astrology signs and zodiac signs are being the talk of the media and

social interactions. Today people take what they know about zodiac signs and apply

them to their way of life. Doing this not only affects the person that applied astrology in

their lifestyle, but it also goes against many other ideas in the world. This causes major

controversies and argumentative debates between people. One big conflict that has

been brought up in this debate is whether or not people should even believe in astrology

in the first place. What is astrology? Well, astrology is the study of stars and other

intergalactic planets in the universe. People today may use this study for “

understanding and predicting human affairs and terrestrial events. Many cultures have

developed astrology systems…”(Netivist.org) in order to be able to predict these traits

and values. The big problem with astrology is that scientists made many debates and

studied to “ refute the accuracy of astrology systems and to explain why so many

people believe astrology is real '' (Netivist.org).This is a very debatable topic since

people that live in more western areas seem to seriously believe and devote their

traditions and cultures to astrology while other cultures and studies shut them down.

(Netivist.org). The lens of this research paper is mainly going to be about the religion

and cultural lens. Furthermore, even though astrology is incorporated into different

cultures and religions, according to science, studies and other main religions, people

shouldn't believe in astrology. Yet, it depends on what someone believes in inorder to

choose to believe in astrology or not. This is important to recognize because today the

PT1-IRR D 2 of 6

world is easily influenced by new technologies and beliefs that cause controversy and

very heated debates that involve the controversy of religion.

Many cultures in the west use astrology as the base of their religion and

traditions. One part of the world that incorporates astrology in their daily lives the most

is India. In India, astrology is important since astrology plays an important role in their

traditional marriage. According divinityeventlighting.com, “When an Indian marriage is

arranged, the charts of the Bride and Groom are actually matched by an astrologist.” By

doing this chart match, it reassures the families happiness and future together. It also

supports traditional Indian culture by uniting the 2 families under the stars. Another

example of this is shown in the article in pparihar.com. In this article it says,“Both stars

circle around each other, instead of usual one star revolving the other. So symbolically

pointed out as a paradigm of marital virtue to the bride in the Hindu marriage

ceremonies.” This quote backs up the statement that was made earlier about the stars

being a big influence to marriage in the Hindu culture. One religion that includes

astrology and the stars more is called Hinduism. Hinduism is the dominant religion in

India that includes rituals and believes in” mystical contemplation and ascetic practices''

( merriam-webster.com).  According to Pewresearch.org, “Hindus are the most likely of

India’s six major religious groups to say they believe in both fate (73%) and astrology

(49%)” (Pewresearch.org).  Even though astrology mostly is practiced in India there are

other countries where astrology is also practiced and believed in. There is a history of

zodiac signs and star belief in China, Egypt, Greece, and early mesopotamia. These

people believe that themselves and their lives are affected by the stars and their

movement. (smithsonianmag.com). Believing in astrology was first started in the early

PT1-IRR D 3 of 6

mesopotamia time period. They viewed astrology as “an ancient and valuable system of

understanding the natural world”. Astrologers back then and now (in the western

civilizations) believe in the stars because they think that our personalities and character

traits are determined and made by the position of the stars at the time of our birth.

Inorder to determine these traits in humans, astrologists and star spiritualists use a

system called the “Natal star chart”. This special chart is also used in predicting the

futures and fortunes of us humans. (smithsonianmag.com). Astrology and zodiac signs

are very important to the western cultures and civilizations regarding their religion and

beliefs. Astrology is a necessity in their culture and it makes them different from all of

the other cultures and regions of the world.

Even though astrology is popular toward the western part of the country, in some

parts of the world it isn't as popular and practiced. In the United States, other religions

like christianity, Protisan, Muslim, and even no religion. Out of these different religions or

beliefs,some of the most popular today in the United States is Christianity which

consists of Protestants and Catholics, and people who are unaffiliated.According to

PRRI, “Nearly one in four Americans (23%) are religiously unaffiliated,...Seven in ten

Americans (70%) identify as Christian,...” (PRRI staff). Using this information, it is clear

to see that the percentage of the people in the United States aren't Hinduists or any

other religion that believes in astrology. So, this clears up a bit of information on why

people may have a heavy debate on whether or not someone should believe in

astrology. This debate happens because of the difference in beliefs, studies, and no

beliefs or opinions. The difference in opinion and religion causes clashes between

multiple other religions and beliefs not only directed towards astrology. For example,

PT1-IRR D 4 of 6

someone who is a protestant believes that believing in astrology is a sin and that it is

unacceptable for a christian protestant to believe and follow astrology. (Outlook.com).

This is one main contributing factor to the heated arguments on whether or not people

in modern day time should believe it or not. Most people today are christians or

associate with no religion so it is hard to come up with a compromise and or a decision.

Another factor that contributes to this situation is how most people in the world who do

not associate with religion believe more in science and the facts rather than the spiritual

associations of religion. Why does this matter? Well, this matters because there are

studies that scientists made which provides evidence that astrology is unreliable.

According to Jarry Jonathan, he says that “Zodiac sign compatibilities and their

professional inclinations, and astrologers’ abilities to match astrological profiles to

individuals have resulted in devastating results for the profession’s credibility”

(Jonathan).When the people know thing like this about astrology in the United States, it

tends to draw the people’s attention away from believing in astrology and zodiac signs.

In the end, there is no possible way to take away the culture and religion that

others believe in. Nor can we change and alter them to fit to all of our likings and

benefits. Even if some people in the United States do believe in Astrology we can't

criticize or force them onto one of the leading religions or beliefs of the country. For

people who live and believe in astrology in the western part of the world, it is normal and

traditional for them to follow. But if we compare this to the beliefs and perspectives of

the United States, there are alot of things that contrast these ideas and ideologies. In

the United States, people are either more secular or more leaning towards christianity

rather than astrology. In the US, even people who are secular base their thoughts on

PT1-IRR D 5 of 6

science and facts. This is very big since this impacts the decision on whether or not

people choose to believe in astrology or not. In my opinion, i believe that we shouldn't

believe in zodiac signs because of that factor of it not being super reliable, but i respect

others opinions on the other perspectives.

Works Cited
“Astrology and Religion: Connection between Fields.” Https://Www.outlookindia.com/, 11 Apr.

2022,

www.outlookindia.com/outlook-spotlight/astrology-and-religion-connection-between-fiel

ds-news-191109.

“Astrology of Indian Weddings – Divinity Event Lighting Specializes in Bistro Lighting,

Uplighting, Monograms and Spotlights. Arizona Event Lighting Expert.”

Https://Divinityeventlighting.com/, 5 Jan. 2020,

divinityeventlighting.com/astrology-of-indian-weddings/.

“Definition of HINDUISM.” Www.merriam-Webster.com,

www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/Hinduism.

Jarry, Jonathan. “How Astrology Escaped the Pull of Science.” Office for Science and Society, 9

Oct. 2020, www.mcgill.ca/oss/article/pseudoscience/how-astrology-escaped-pull-science.

Mccarthy, Julie. “In India, Science and Astrology Comfortably Coexist.” NPR.org, 25 Sept.

2014,

www.npr.org/sections/parallels/2014/09/25/351373672/in-india-scientific-prowess-and-fa

scination-with-astrology-co-exist. Accessed 7 Dec. 2022.

PT1-IRR D 6 of 6

Mitchell, Travis. “11. Religious Beliefs.” Pew Research Center’s Religion & Public Life Project,

29 June 2021,

www.pewresearch.org/religion/2021/06/29/religious-beliefs-2/#:~:text=Most%20Indians

%20believe%20in%20fate%2C%20fewer%20believe%20in%20astrology&text=Fewer%

20Indians%20believe%20in%20astrology.

Orth, Taylor. “One in Four Americans Say They Believe in Astrology | YouGov.”

Today.yougov.com, 26 Apr. 2022,

today.yougov.com/topics/entertainment/articles-reports/2022/04/26/one-four-americans-s

ay-they-believe-astrology.

PRRI Staff. “The 2020 Census of American Religion.” PRRI, 8 July 2021,

www.prri.org/research/2020-census-of-american-religion/.

Swaddle, The. “Why Do People Still Believe in Astrology?” The Swaddle, 24 June 2020,

theswaddle.com/why-do-people-still-believe-in-astrology/.

“Ancient Indian Marriage and Twin Star System.” HINDUISM and SANATAN DHARMA, 3 Feb.

2016, pparihar.com/2016/02/03/ancient-indian-marriage-and-twin-star-system/. Accessed

18 Jan. 2023.