Who is acidifying our ocean?

(Word Title: 656)

Introduction

By the year 2100 if ocean acidification continues our ocean PH level would be 100-150%

times more acidic. (Jiang) According to the EPA, United States Environmental Protection

Agency, marine acidification faces a ¨two twofold ¨challenge against ocean acidification. The

EPA also states that ocean acidification is a challenge in that it can harm life that depends on

carbonate-based shells/skeletons, harm organisms that are sensitive to acidity, and lastly it can

affect animals that are higher in the food chain that feed on the affected animals. Apart from this,

the term ¨Ocean Acidification¨ is referred to as the lowering level of the pH level in the ocean

(NOAA). The reason why it's important is that the whole ocean is getting affected which is

everyone’s ocean and people worldwide rely on food from the ocean. However, do large

corporations contribute more to ocean acidification than we individuals? There are many ways to

think of this question but if we don’t do anything people might not know what the future holds. I

believe that if we don’t change anything about our actions I believe our oceans will be ruined.

Additionally, both individuals and big companies have equal responsibility for ocean

acidification. Viewing it in a futuristic way has helped contribute to seeing what can be some of

the many outcomes.

How is ocean acidification caused?

Ocean acidification is caused by carbon dioxide. Carbon dioxide can come from multiple

sources like individuals and corporations. According to the EPA, it is said that a person averages

about 4.6 metric tons of carbon dioxide per year. Adding on, this number can vary due to many

reasons like the number of miles. This shows that a single person with a gas car can create a

significant amount of carbon dioxide. On these terms, we can presumably imagine the vast

amount of carbon emissions by multiple people owning gas-fuel cars. However, it’s not only the

individuals who create carbon emissions but corporations as well. According to NRDC, the US’s

most effective and successful environmental group has reported: “100 energy companies have

been responsible for 71% of all industrial emissions”. Ultimately, this is only 100 companies out

of many other energy companies. Most of this research is from the present, which leads there

might be larger numbers in the future if things continue. However, if carbon emissions continue

from both individuals and corporations our ocean can be left in ruins.

How do Corporations contribute to OA?

Corporations emit a vast amount of carbon dioxide. Approximately, corporations make

about 108 metric tons of carbon dioxide due to plastic production (CIEL). CIEL is a trustable

organization that has launched projects to better the environment and has received a charity score

of 99%, additionally earning its 4-star rating. As suggested by CIEL a solution for this is to end

the production and use of single-use plastic. According to Statista, in 2021 in the US the

corporation with the most carbon dioxide emissions was Vistra Energy with 112 million metric

tons. Statista is the go-to for governments, academics, and businesses for accurate and reliable

data. Statists have also been used for teaching purposes. This truly shows how much carbon

emissions corporations contribute to. However, it is also best to see about the consumers, the

individual.

How do individuals contribute to ocean acidification?

Individuals can also create carbon emissions, all together it adds up to a lot of carbon

dioxide. A report by the EPA shows that transportation made up 28% of greenhouse gasses in

2021. Carbon dioxide is one of the greenhouse gasses which is acidifying our ocean.

Transportation can be cars, buses, trains, etc. ”A 2015 study found that the production and use of

household goods and services was responsible for 60 percent of global greenhouse gas

emissions” (Cho). This is a report from the Columbia Climate School. With the research, it

shows that individuals can indeed create a vast amount of carbon emission.

If carbon emissions continue, our oceans will be acidified. Both individuals and

corporations have an equal responsibility to ocean acidification.

Works Cited

US EPA, OAR. “Greenhouse Gas Emissions from a Typical Passenger Vehicle.” Www.epa.gov,

12 Jan. 2016,

www.epa.gov/greenvehicles/greenhouse-gas-emissions-typical-passenger-vehicle#:~:text

=A%20typical%20passenger%20vehicle%20emits.

Axelrod, Josh. “Corporate Honesty and Climate Change: Time to Own up and Act.”

Www.nrdc.org, 26 Feb. 2019,

www.nrdc.org/bio/josh-axelrod/corporate-honesty-and-climate-change-time-own-and-act

#:~:text=Corporations%20produce%20just%20about%20everything.

“Plastic & Climate: The Hidden Costs of a Plastic Planet.” Center for International

Environmental Law,

www.ciel.org/project-update/plastic-climate-the-hidden-costs-of-a-plastic-planet/#:~:text

=Extraction%20and%20Transport.

“Largest Corporate GHG Emitters in the U.S 2019.” Statista,

www.statista.com/statistics/260363/largest-corporate-air-polluters-in-the-united-states/#:~

:text=The%20largest%20corporate%20emitter%20in.

Environmental Protection Agency. “Sources of Greenhouse Gas Emissions.” United States

Environmental Protection Agency, 5 Oct. 2023,

www.epa.gov/ghgemissions/sources-greenhouse-gas-emissions.