The Social Influence of Collegiate Sports

Word Count: 1089

College brings new experiences and life lessons to young adolescents entering into the

real world. New and foreign responsibilities are added onto college students who are leaving

home for the first time on top of keeping up with school work and their social lives. While the

college experience already puts a lot on college students, collegiate student-athletes have an extra

responsibility on their backs. In his quote, Earl Campbell- former NFL player- says, “I talk to

student-athletes. I try to get them to remember that they’re not just athletes, but student-athletes.

You need to get an education, keep your hands clean and try to represent the university.”

However, student athletes may also experience a few benefits especially on the social side.

Through the social lens, collegiate athletes can be analyzed to determine the social benefits

college athletics may bring.

To start, sports create a sense of community for collegiate athletes that other students may

struggle to find. In 2017, the Journal of Applied Sports Psychology published an article

emphasizing the idea that, “leaders, coaches, teammates, and teachers create a social

psychological climate through their behaviors and interpersonal interactions with followers,

players, fellow teammates, and students” (Hall et. al 2017). College athletics create an

environment and a web of connections and relationships. Through participating in a sport,

college athletes are surrounded by peers with common interests, goals, and other similarities.

Student athletes can form new relationships and meet new people. Social interactions are more

important than ever in modern day society due to new technologies and social media. Jan

Schaffer, a civic journalist, reports that, “people’s social and emotional intelligence have been

impaired by the displacement of personal interactions with online interactions” (Anderson and

Rainie 2018). Meaningful social interactions have decreased in the modern society run by

technology. However, sports can act as an outlet for collegiate athletes to still maintain social

interactions while keeping up with school work, responsibilities, and the sport itself. Oftentimes,

the sport requires these social interactions to take place. Along with allowing social interactions

to bloom, “[sports are] thought to bring people of diverse backgrounds into a common

community” (Dixon and Warner 2011). The increasing diversity of sports teams across the

country can allow athletes to experience new cultures and learn to work with others from

different backgrounds. A sense of community allows all athletes to feel belonging and safety

with others, no matter their race, religion, or ethnicity. Why does a sense of community matter?

A sense of community not only increases social interactions but also “a strong SOC, [sense of

community], is associated with subjective well-being among members, decreased levels of

loneliness, lower drug use and delinquency among students, and increased civic participation”

(Dixon and Warner 2011). Collegiate sports can help collegiate athletes integrate into college

life. From high school to college, resocialization occurs and sports create an easier pathway for

student athletes to integrate into a new society and adulthood.

In addition, through a sense of community created in sports teams, interpersonal skills

can be used and developed. Through their study of athletic identity and life roles of collegiate

athletes, Griffith and Johnson, sponsored by the Department of Psychology at University of

Wisconsin La Crosse, explore the fact that “college years are a dynamic period of development

for students. Key developmental tasks include establishing independence, solidifying a firm

identity, learning to manage relationships, and planning for future and lifestyle goals” (Griffith

and Johnson 2002). After high school, students enter the real world and leave for college, exiting

the protection and comfort of their home and parents. Consequently, away from the support of

their parents, college students take on new responsibilities of adulthood which is a culture shock

for many. However, athletics can help teach students “self-discipline, teamwork, confidence,

work ethic, and leadership,” that aid students in the dynamic period of development in college

(Griffith and Johnson 2002). While interpersonal skills can be instrumental in college, they also

can be applicable to the workforce and career settings. Interpersonal skills are important to

effective communication and being involved in the social interactions and environments careers

may entail. All in all, “sport events could be leveraged to enrich social lives, aid in building

social capital, and advance social initiatives” (Dixon and Warner 2011). Participation in college

athletics channels social skills and interactions with teammates as well as coaches. Sports help

athletes gain social skills and initiate contact with teammates that can consequently help athletes

make new friends. Whether still in college or not, developing social skills through sports can

benefit student-athletes for the rest of their lives.

On the contrary, student athletes may find time management a struggle while competing

at a high level. According to the NCAA, a nonprofit organization that regulates student athletics

and athletic programs of colleges across the United States, “one of the biggest adjustments to

college life is learning how to manage your time between academics, athletics, employment,

social life and perhaps most importantly, sleep,” (“Balance Your Schedule” 2021). College is a

huge life adjustment for college students leaving home for the first time. While many students

struggle with time management, student athletes have an extra responsibility for sports in order

to compete at the top level. As a result, when surveyed by Frontiers in Psychology in their

academic journal, student athletes reported time management as being their biggest challenge

related to academic performance (Davis et. al 2019). While time management may take awhile

for new student athletes to figure out, in the long run, it prepares student athletes for the future.

After college, student athletes will greatly benefit from the time management skills acquired and

can then apply them to career settings. Seeming restrictive at the moment, the time management

skills acquired will come in handy for the future.

In conclusion, the social lives of collegiate student athletes can be enriched through

sports teams and events. Establishing a sense of community teaches athletes interpersonal skills,

provides them with an outlet of social interactions, and exposes them to new cultures and people

with different backgrounds. Also, collegiate sports can help students develop social skills and

ease into college life as well as adulthood. Finally, while time management may be problematic

for new student athletes with school, sports, and keeping a social life, it teaches time

management skills that can be applied to the workforce in the future. The transition from high

school to college is difficult for many. However, the social life of a collegiate life, while it may

be busy, prepares students for the realities of the real world.

References

Anderson, J., & Rainie, L. (2018, April 17). 3. concerns about the future of people’s

well-being. Pew Research Center: Internet, Science & Tech.

https://www.pewresearch.org/internet/2018/04/17/concerns-about-the-future-of-peoples-

well-being/

Balance your schedule. NCAA.org. (n.d.).

https://www.ncaa.org/sports/2021/7/9/balance-your-schedule.aspx

Davis, P., Halvarsson, A., Lundström, W., & Lundqvist, C. (2019, July 30). Alpine Ski

Coaches’ and athletes’ perceptions of factors influencing adaptation to stress in the

classroom and on the slopes. Frontiers in psychology.

https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6682589/

Dixon, M. A., & Warner, S. (2011). (PDF) understanding sense of community from the

athlete’s perspective. ResearchGate.net.

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/280300467_Understanding_Sense_of_Commun

ity_From_the_Athlete’s_Perspective

Griffith, K. A., & Johnson, K. A. (2002). Athletic Identity and life roles of Division I and

DivisionIIIhttps://www.uwlax.edu/globalassets/offices-services/urc/jur-online/pdf/2002/g

riffh_and_johnson.pdf

Hall, M. S., Newland, A., Newton, M., Podlog, L., & Baucom, B. R. (2017). Perceptions

of the Social Psychological Climate and Sport Commitment in Adolescent Athletes: A

Multilevel Analysis. Journal of Applied Sport Psychology, 29(1), 75–87.

https://doi.org/10.1080/10413200.2016.1174906