Animal Testing: The Laws of Experimentation

Word Count: 1095

Animal Testing: The Laws of Experimentation

80 million tests are done on animals annually, but only 8%  have been deemed successful

(Animal Legal Defense Fund, 2022). Animal testing has been an issue, not always accurately

predicting human symptoms. The American Anti-Vivisection Society (2024) claims that patients

and physicians should be wary of products resulting from animal testing because it does not

always replicate well in human clinical research. Animal testing is a global problem as they are

being tested everywhere, and the risk to animals’ health is not worth the harm inflicted on them.

Even if animal testing does not guarantee success, it is still helpful in predicting effects on

humans. A recent example has been the COVID-19 vaccines. Animals were used to test new

vaccinations to remain within the legal and ethical guidelines set by governments. This begs the

question; what is the best way to mitigate harmful testing done to animals while ensuring human

safety? Many patterns found in legal acts, laws, and guidelines include the Animal Welfare Act,

the use of the International Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC), and the administration of

drugs to the animal before the testing.

Created in 1966 to mitigate animal testing, the Animal Welfare Act (AWA) has many

laws and rules on how to treat animals. It defines “laboratory animals” and gives circumstances

where animals can be used. The Food and Agriculture Organization, a specialized agency in the

United Nations, published a copy of the AWA from the United States Congress, including the

basic provisions concerning animal management and treatment. The AWA states that animals

should not go through unnecessary pain without an ethical cause (Food and Agriculture

Organization, n.d). They argue that the AWA has a large impact on the treatment of animals in

testing laboratories. The United States Department of Agriculture put out regulations that keep

animals safe and ethically treated. (Foundation for Biomedical Research, n.d). By setting high

ethical standards for animals, animals receive equal treatment to humans. This was implemented

to keep animals safe, unharmed, and ethically treated. Supervisors are needed to ensure ethical

care. Andrew D. Cardon, a researcher at the National Association for Biomedical Research,

wrote that the AWA has requirements for research facilities including registrations,  IACUC,

veterinary care, and annual reports (Cardon, 2012). However, Naoko Kagiyama and Tatsuji

Nomura, both researchers of animal testing in Japan, claim that animal regulations are regulated

by law but the IACUC, registration, and legal inspections are not regulated by law (2004). The

AWA in America has created many high standards created to keep animals safe and mitigate

unneeded cruelty.

Laws and acts are made to set guidelines in society, but the enforcement of these acts is

not brought to light. Like other acts, the AWA is set in place by the US Government, but

enforcement falls under the administrator of APHIS (Cardon, 2012). The inspections of the lab

are done by veterinary medical officers who then report to NCI, and are turned to the

Investigative and Enforcement Services. The AWA and other acts are being enforced with fines

and charges. Additionally, various administrative laws are put in place to ensure smooth cohesion

in the process of animal testing. The Foundation of Biomedical Research said that institutions are

required to state their reasons for the use of animals in testing. The IACUC is required by law to

oversee the experiments done on the animal. IACUC committees consist of one veterinarian and

one community representative, unaffiliated with the institution. They have the power to reject a

proposal or cancel the project entirely (Foundation for Biomedical Research). The IACUC

ensures that the testing is ethical and if the proper standards are not met, the test and project are

scrapped. With the IACUC in place to enforce the AWA, many other acts follow to make their

enforcers. The Health Research Extension Act of 1985, posted by the National Institute of

Health, stated that there must be a chief executive officer, a veterinarian, and a person

unaffiliated with the group. These people must review the care and treatment of the animals

alongside keeping files to prove that the reviews have been conducted (NIH, n.d). Much like the

IACUC, this committee was created for the enforcement of the Health Research Extension Act

of 1985. Roles and committees have been created for the sake of animal safety. All employed

conduct reviews and careful analysis to make sure ethical care is provided. With the enactment of

the AWA and enforcement of the laws, animal care has been the number 1 priority in

laboratories. The National Institute of Health made a guideline so that it can be ensured that the

animals are treated safely with health being prioritized. Testing of animals is considered a

privilege, institutions must care for the animals in the most ethical, humane way possible (NIH,

2012). If deemed unethical, facilities may close from their visible neglect.  The care of animals is

important all around. The AWA has set high standards for housing, feeding, cleanliness,

ventilation, and medical care (The Foundation of Biomedical Research, n.d). The AWA caused

many changes in the scientific community that provided ethical and medical care while also

providing basic necessities. The National Institute of Health stated that investigators must

presume procedures will be harmful unless scientifically or medically proven otherwise. They

also make sure that animals are sedated and that surgery or painful procedures can only be done

on anesthetized animals. They argue that with procedures, surgery, and research, pain/distress

levels in animals can be reduced. The creation of the AWA sparked an uproar over guidelines and

the care of animals in testing. Following the AWA, many guidelines and rules were created to

help the animals decrease unnecessary pain or distress. With the inclusion of housing, feeding,

cleanliness, and ventilation along with sedation, animals are calmer and more open to

cooperating.

With the AWA, the IACUC enforcing it, proper care decreases the harmful and painful

effects of testing. The IACUC has veterinarians, unaffiliated committee members, and executive

officers. They enforce the guidelines and rules planted by the Animal Welfare Act. The

guidelines offer animals basic living requirements and ethical treatment. It also offers proper care

like housing and cleanliness. The implication of this is the better treatment of animals and

possibly less testing. The solution is to make better laws that fully cover the minute details that

can further the care of animals. The consequences would be less testing and possibly more illegal

testing. The information presented can help the overall team as without these laws, the

environmental and ethical lenses would not be possible.

References

American Anti-Vivisection Society. (2024, October 16). Problems with animal research -

American Anti-Vivisection Society.

https://aavs.org/animals-science/problems-animal-research/

Animal Legal Defense Fund. (2022, August 9). Animals used in research - Animal Legal Defense

Fund.

https://aldf.org/focus_area/animals-used-in-research/#:~:text=According%20to%20the%2

0U.S.%20Food,use%20%E2%80%94%2092%25%20are%20not.

Cardon, A. D., Bailey, M. R., & Bennett, B. T. (2012). The Animal Welfare Act: From enactment

to enforcement. Journal of the American Association for Laboratory Animal Science:

JAALAS, 51(3), 301–305.

Foundation for Biomedical Research. (n.d.) About animal testing regulations. FBR

https://fbresearch.org/animal-care/animal-testing-regulations

H.R.724 - 116th congress (2019-2020): PACT act. library of congress. Library of Congress.

https://www.congress.gov/bill/116th-congress/house-bill/724

Health Research Extension Act of 1985 | OLAW. (n.d).

https://olaw.nih.gov/policies-laws/hrea-1985.htm

International guiding principles for biomedical research ... (n.d.-d).

https://grants.nih.gov/grants/olaw/guiding_principles_2012.pdf

National Academies Press (US). (2004). Japanese regulations on animal experiments: Current

status and perspectives. The Development of Science-based Guidelines for Laboratory

Animal Care - NCBI Bookshelf. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK25422/

The Animal Welfare Act. (n.d.-b). https://faolex.fao.org/docs/pdf/swe19544E.pdf