How can the government’s role in shaping U.S. food safety

standards help the food industry?

Did you know food in specific places have less regulation or care given to them. We can

see this though the food safety standard in the USA is a very complex system. Throughout

the USA people rely on the safety provided by this organization. Many people overlook how

the government works on protecting their citizens. With illnesses appearing constantly,

food safety regulation is getting less attention. According to many food safety articles we

can see a distinct change in laws or regulation in food. The people entrust the government

with their health and sustainability but by not allowing laws to be impacted by their

change.

The government regulates food safety with other districts such as the FDA and the USDA.

This teamwork helps build trust with the community as each holds outstanding records.

The popularity of the USDA shows how many citizens actively rely on the people in this

department. Trusting the government can be hard for someone who has faced injury

through it. Companies all around the world show deep care in not allowing their reputation

to hold them back. As scandals are a dime a dozen for food industries, some may face

harsher criticism or retaliations due to their consumers.

Laws regarding food make it so that not one company is on top or above the law. It shows a

clear understanding by allowing smaller organizations to slowly start to grow. Though the

companies and industries all follow the exact same law it can often start to bend if they

can hide it well. To keep their industry productive and create more jobs and money for their

workers many businesses cut back on certain things. To increase production, they just

make it so that one of the jobs they have is basically useless. Money or tradition is the only

thing keeping many businesses alive with the want to be able to collect or receive goods.

Between creating new policies or enforcing older ones many politians start to choose sides

not wanting to invest more money into the government.

Outside the US we can see the stream of markets popping up everywhere, even if they are

not as popular in the regional area, they may have a chance in the international market if

their product is good or there an want or need for it. The distribution of food to offshore

places shows how even if somebody doesn't want or need the market there is always

someone who does. An example of this is the plant ¨Casava¨ it is a common plant that

help many African countries in survival becoming a staple food in the community. But this

can only be seen in African countries as rarely does its popularity move. The plants roots

help many families in time of drought as they are quite resistant. This plant is quite-

common in drought areas but with a more open market in other countries it shows a

decline in sales.

Experiments on food have changed drastically over the years, many creating illnesses in

the food or destroying illness in the food. With regulations being all around in the scientific

community it is quite hard to find food without specific laws on it. As time goes on people

want something new, just a little change to what they eat but they don't want to change the

look.

 The iconic look of fruits and vegetables are unforgettable, only the color changes if you

find a different species. But under certain circumstances there has been many time where

scientists genetically altered fruit. This can range from a different color or taste depending

on what is popular for their consumers. Only the government can approve of these

changes as long as they can prove that the food is edible and healthy. Leaving dangerous

chemicals in the body can cause great harm to someone, often leading to a lawsuit.

Demand for food shows what many of the food markets are successful and which ones are

not. It is often seen in bigger cities that regulation can start to faulter is they see the profit

margins increase. However, during many statewide regulations, they are commonly found

and induce a multitude of lawsuits or fines. In my opinion, I think that the laws installed by

the government show not only understanding for their people and their health but also how

differently laws can create or help others. The agriculture of the world holds us back as

people don't know what they are eating but it is the duty of the USA to find out what it is,

how it works and if it hurts their citizens.

In society many people don't often disclose what they've eaten in the regular and usually

blame illness in the food that have be overlooked by the inspectors. This leads to many

cases of food contamination or illness. I recent years many news outlets have cracked

down on the hidden world of food and the agriculture business. Headlining many top

articles precising or dismissing allegations in the industry.

In conclusion, people around the world have better living condition. Though with the most

people can do is wash food with water or be able to afford harsh cleaning chemicals. That

may end up in even more trouble if they are not properly used, causing injury in or around

the industry. If this goes on, we can see how people are affected by different chemicals

leading to many changes in the production methods. However, in different countries we

can either see a decline in food safety or more quality standards being implemented. WE

can see this often in India and Japan. While India strives on an open culture oof food they

often disregard things they can't see. Often resulting in hunger as more people get injured

by the production plants. Though in Japan you can clearly see they care a lot about food

health. With small implications being put on food for a better quality or quantity algorithm.

1,000 words

https://www.cdc.gov/food-safety/index.html

https://ijbpas.com/pdf/2023/October/MS_IJBPAS_2023_7482.pdf