2025

AP Research
Academic Paper
®

Sample Student Responses
and Scoring Commentary

Inside:
Sample A
☑5 Scoring Guidelines
☑5 Student Samples
☑5 Scoring Commentary

© 2025 College Board. College Board, Advanced Placement, AP, AP Central, and the acorn logo are registered trademarks of
College Board. AP Capstone is a trademark owned by College Board. Visit College Board on the web: collegeboard.org.
AP Central is the official online home for the AP Program: apcentral.collegeboard.org.

AP® Research 2025 Scoring Guidelines

Academic Paper

5 Points

Report on Existing Knowledge

Report on Existing Knowledge
with Simplistic Use of a Research
Method

Score of 2

Score of 3

Ineffectual Argument for a New
Understanding

Well-Supported, Articulate
Argument Conveying a New
Understanding

Score of 4

Score of 5

• Presents an overly broad topic of
inquiry.

• Presents a topic of inquiry with
narrowing scope or focus, that is
NOT carried through either in the
method or in the overall line of
reasoning.

• Carries the focus or scope of a
topic of inquiry through the
method AND overall line of
reasoning, even though the focus
or scope might still be narrowing.

• Focuses a topic of inquiry with
clear and narrow parameters,
which are addressed through the
method and the conclusion.

• Focuses a topic of inquiry with
clear and narrow parameters,
which are addressed through the
method and the conclusion.

• Situates a topic of inquiry within
a single perspective derived from
scholarly works OR through a
variety of perspectives derived
from mostly non-scholarly works.

• Situates a topic of inquiry within
a single perspective derived from
scholarly works OR through a
variety of perspectives derived
from mostly non-scholarly works.

• Situates a topic of inquiry within
relevant scholarly works of
varying perspectives, although
connections to some works may
be unclear

• Explicitly connects a topic of
inquiry to relevant scholarly
works of varying perspectives
AND logically explains how the
topic of inquiry addresses a gap.

• Explicitly connects a topic of
inquiry to relevant scholarly
works of varying perspectives
AND logically explains how the
topic of inquiry addresses a gap.

• Describes a search and report
process.

• Describes a nonreplicable
research method OR provides an
oversimplified description of a
method, with questionable
alignment to the purpose of the
inquiry.

• Describes a reasonably replicable
research method, with
questionable alignment to the
purpose of the inquiry.

• Logically defends the alignment
of a detailed, replicable research
method to the purpose of the
inquiry

• Logically defends the alignment
of a detailed, replicable research
method to the purpose of the
inquiry.

• Summarizes or reports existing
knowledge in the field of
understanding pertaining to the
topic of inquiry.

• Summarizes or reports existing
knowledge in the field of
understanding pertaining to the
topic of inquiry.

• Conveys a new understanding or
conclusion, with an
underdeveloped line of reasoning
OR insufficient evidence.

• Supports a new understanding or
conclusion through a logically
organized line of reasoning AND
sufficient evidence. The
limitations and/or implications, if
present, of the new
understanding or conclusion are
oversimplified.

• Justifies a new understanding or
conclusion through a logical
progression of inquiry choices,
sufficient evidence, explanation
of the limitations of the
conclusion, and an explanation of
the implications to the
community of practice.

• Generally communicates the
student’s ideas, although errors
in grammar, discipline-specific
style, and organization distract or
confuse the reader.

• Generally communicates the
student’s ideas, although errors
in grammar, discipline-specific
style, and organization distract or
confuse the reader.

• Competently communicates the
student’s ideas, although there
may be some errors in grammar,
discipline-specific style, and
organization.

• Competently communicates the
student’s ideas, although there
may be some errors in grammar,
discipline-specific style, and
organization.

• Enhances the communication of
the student’s ideas through
organization, use of design
elements, conventions of
grammar, style, mechanics, and
word precision, with few to no
errors.

• Cites AND/OR attributes sources
(in bibliography/ works cited
and/or intext), with multiple
errors and/or an inconsistent use
of a discipline specific style.

• Cites AND/OR attributes sources
(in bibliography/ works cited
and/or intext), with multiple
errors and/or an inconsistent use
of a discipline specific style.

• Cites AND attributes sources,
using a discipline-specific style (in
both bibliography/works cited
AND intext), with few errors or
inconsistencies.

• Cites AND attributes sources,
with a consistent use of an
appropriate discipline-specific
style (in both bibliography/works
cited AND intext), with few to no
errors.

• Cites AND attributes sources,
with a consistent use of an
appropriate discipline-specific
style (in both bibliography/works
cited AND intext), with few to no
errors.

Score of 1

Rich Analysis of a New
Understanding Addressing a Gap
in the Research Base

© 2025 College Board

Research Sample A 1 of 32

Methylene Blue Dye Removal with Loose and Compacted Coffee Grounds

AP Research
April 28, 2024
Word Count: 5100

Research Sample A 2 of 32
DYE ADSORPTION

2

Introduction
In recent years, the concern to make clothing production ethical and sustainable has risen.
People now have access to worldwide media that shows the destructive nature of the fashion
industry. As a result, consumers have begun to push for more ethical practices and brand
transparency. In 2013, the collapse of Rana Plaza, a major clothing manufacturer in Bangladesh,
raised the question, “How are my clothes being made?” for many consumers (International
Labour Organization, 2023). Clothing that reaches consumers is not a simple product; it is raw
material, such as cotton, that is processed in a factory, turned into thread and yarn, made into a
textile, dyed, and ultimately turned into a garment, shipped from the global south to be sold to
consumers in the west. The production process in fast fashion has led to environmental ruin,
most notably in waterways near dyehouses (Mustapha et al., 2023). The areas surrounding the
dyehouses, the places where clothing gets dyed, are often polluted with runoff from clothing
factories because paying fines is cheaper than treating the wastewater, which leads to cheaper
production costs and lower prices for consumers (Niinimäki, 2021). Besides the visual effects of
dye wastewater in waterways, dyes can harm people’s health. Dyes such as methylene blue can
cause heart rate increase, jaundice, and quadriplegia with constant exposure (Mustapha et al.
2023). If the use of water in dyehouses can be changed to a circular model that reuses dye water,
then dyed water can have minimal effects in nearby waterways, and more efforts can be spent on
addressing water treatment for the current polluted bodies of water. This hypothetical model of
reusing dyewater to dye clothing begins with research on dye removal. A commonly studied form
of dye removal is adsorption using activated carbon, the basis of this research. Studies show that
activated carbon from organic materials can be used for dye adsorption, thus suggesting that nonactivated carbon can be used to remove dyes from water (Mutalib et al., 2023). An example of

Research Sample A 3 of 32
DYE ADSORPTION

3

accessible material is coffee grounds, a waste produced by an entire industry worldwide. It is
estimated that 60 million tons of used coffee grounds are produced each year globally (Nealon,
2025). This makes coffee grounds easily accessible in high quantities. Researching dye removal
using waste products that are not chemically activated lowers the cost and offers the potential for
a low-cost dye removal method. If the water treatment method is low-cost and efficient,
companies will be more inclined to treat the water. To contribute to the objective of a low-cost
dye adsorption method, this study researched the efficiency of coffee grounds as a form of dye
adsorption in loose and compacted forms.
Literature Review
1. Fashion Cycles
Fast fashion is the production of clothing in response to consumer-indicated desires in an
abnormally fast manner (Berhane, 2024). This increase in clothing production is not new; the
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill Ethics and Policy blog reports that consumers are
buying 60% more than before because fast fashion clothing is relatively cheaper (Berhane,
2024). For a simplified comparison, individuals who used to buy five pieces of clothing on an
average trip to the mall are now buying around eight pieces of clothing, most likely of a lower
quality. Georgetown Journal of International Affairs reports that from 1996 to 2012, there was a
36% decrease in garment usage (Niinimäki, 2021). For the average consumer, this means that
only about five of the eight garments purchased are used. This cycle will only increase over time,
with the fast fashion industry projected to be worth 39.58 billion dollars this year (Hajad et al.,
2024). The decrease in clothing usage, increase in fast-fashion consumption, and rapid trends
will ultimately cause global textile waste to reach 132 million tons per year in 2030 (Chen et al.,
2021).

Research Sample A 4 of 32
DYE ADSORPTION

4

2. Environmental Pollution
A major issue with the fast fashion industry is the pollution it causes. Most of the clothing
made in countries such as Indonesia and Bangladesh rely heavily on clothing production to keep
the workforce and economy alive, but many of the companies with textile factories in these
countries will take shortcuts in manufacturing with actions such as throwing wastewater into
local bodies of water (Regan, 2020). Examples of this are Gap and Brooks Brothers, both
prominent figures in fashion, discharging pollutants into Indonesia's Citarum River (Elks, 2020).
This ultimately plays into the garment industry being responsible for 20% of the world’s water
pollution (Regan, 2020). The emphasis of this study is on water pollution in the fashion industry.
The water currently used in production is clean drinking water, and many articles of clothing
require lots of water in the production stages (Mogavero, 2020). A single pair of jeans requires
up to 7500 liters of water in manufacturing, mostly for the dying process (Regan, 2020). An
increase in consumption and manufacturing indicates that an innovation in the dying process is
required. In “Studies on the Removal of Acid Blue 25 from Wastewater using Activated Carbon
and Turmeric”, P. Santhosh reports that in 2013, there were more than 12,000 commercial dyes
available to dye clothing. Now, this number could have easily doubled.
3. Textile Dyes
Textile dyes are what give clothing its color (Bawa et al., 2023). Dying clothing to appear
lively and more attractive is nothing new. The distinguishing aspect of clothing now is that they
are dyed with synthetic dyes (Mabuza et al., 2023). The dyes that are used to color clothing have
complex aromatic structures, which means that they are stable and difficult to break apart
(Ranson, 2020). As a result, the removal of dye from wastewater or bodies of water has been

Research Sample A 5 of 32
DYE ADSORPTION

5

difficult and expensive. This recurrence of this issue has led to the research of activated carbon in
treating wastewater for dye removal.
4. Dye Adsorption with Activated Carbon
Researchers have found that one of the most effective ways to remove dye from water is to
use activated carbon. Activated carbon is described as a raw material, such as coconut husk, that
is processed with heat and an acid or base (Bawa et al., 2024). Activated carbon can be made
from any material that has a large carbon content. The study “Combined Absorbent of Corn
Husks and Eggshells Activated by Sodium Hydroxide as an Adsorbent for Remazol Yellow FG
dye in Textile Waste” by Bawa et al. researched how activated carbon from corn husk and
eggshells with NaOH (a base) and HCl (an acid) can impact dye removal. Bawa et al. report that
the optimal conditions are with a pH of 2 and a contact time of 80 minutes. These conditions,
with the activated carbon, adsorbed 27.87% of the dye. Analysis showed that this process is not
effective for industrial use because of the time needed to activate the carbon, and the contact time
needed for results could not remove 30% of the dye from the solution. As a result, more research
is needed on how a material with a high carbon percentage can be dried and used for dye
adsorption. One issue addressed by Bawa was the fact that the drying oven used in the
experiment took a considerable amount of time. To address this issue of drying time, Beyer
conducted similar research on dye adsorption using microwaves as the drying method. Because
microwave ovens operate by vibrating molecules such as water in a substance to make them
produce heat, Beyer was able to reduce the drying time down to 20 minutes, making the dye
adsorbent process efficient (Beyer, 2023). Further research has applied this knowledge when
using coffee as the source of carbon. The study “Comprehensive functionality analysis of spent
coffee grounds activated using microwave-assisted method” was successfully able to use

Research Sample A 6 of 32
DYE ADSORPTION

6

microwaved dried spent coffee grounds to remove methylene blue from a solution (Mutalib et al.,
2023). Although certain variables throughout these studies were changed, they were able to prove
that activated carbon can remove dye from water, and two studies proved that it can be done with
microwave assistance; most notably, activated spent coffee grounds were able to remove dye.
5. Gap
Although numerous studies have shown that activated carbon is effective at removing dye
from water and can be affected by characteristics such as pH, contact time, and temperature, few
studies have researched whether carbon without chemical activation can be used as a dye
adsorbent. This absence led me to research the effectiveness of dried spent coffee grounds as a
form of dye removal. After experimentation and additional research, the component of
compaction was examined to see if it could have an impact on the effectiveness of dye removal.
If spent coffee grounds could be dried and compacted, then they could remove the dye from the
water without a difficult separation process after treatment. It is hypothesized that there will be a
significant difference between the solution that is treated with the compacted coffee and the
solution treated with loose coffee. Compaction will make the separation process more efficient
because extensive filtering is not needed, which saves time, making it an efficient method of dye
adsorption that uses a throwaway product. If further research is conducted on the impact of
activation and compaction with spent coffee grounds as a form of dye removal, then companies
can be more inclined to incorporate a water treatment method that does not revolve around waste
disposal.
Methodology
This study aims to determine if methylene blue dye can be removed from a solution using
dried spent coffee grounds under multiple conditions. The test procedures involved incorporating

Research Sample A 7 of 32
DYE ADSORPTION

7

the two forms of coffee into a methylene blue solution, with six types of experiments conducted
four times each. The experimentation method was a mixed qualitative and quantitative
experiment. The data that was recorded was analyzed using spectrophotometry as well as visual
analysis of the changes before and after treatment. The experiments manipulated the size of the
coffee grounds, the mass of the coffee grounds, and the length of time the experiment ran. Each
experiment was an attempt to find a correlation between treatment and dye removal through
color change. Similar experimentation provided a model for dye adsorption using spent coffee
grounds. Mutalib, as mentioned previously, used coffee from nearby shops and dried them at
different wattages before activation. Mutalib showed that the change in color with activated
coffee dried using a microwave was statistically significant (Mutalib et al., 2023). This study also
showed optimal drying conditions being at 100 watts, but due to limitations of a household
microwave being used, the wattage used in this study was 1000. Once the base experimentation
of spent coffee grounds began, I noticed that the coffee grounds still left a substance with a
yellow hue. This led to further research on the concept of compaction as it pertains to dye
adsorption. The study “Effect of activated carbon compaction on water filtration efficiency”
showed that activated carbon, like in Mutalib’s study, could be compacted in a puck-like
filtration device to optimize the effectiveness of activated carbon when removing a pollutant
(Mersal et al., 2024). With this information, the experiment set up was revised to include the
“pellet” component, where the coffee was compacted into tiny disks and used as a comparison
against the loose coffee grounds to determine if coffee grounds would be more effective at
removing dye if the contact was indirect. This would allow the solution to be treated without the
yellow tint left by the loose coffee grounds.

Research Sample A 8 of 32
DYE ADSORPTION

8

Figure 1. Different Treatments Used to Remove Methylene Blue Dye From a Solution

1. Preparing the Methylene Blue Solution
The first step in the experiment was preparing the methylene blue solution. The
methylene blue solution consists of methylene blue powder and distilled water. The distilled
water ensures minimal impurities, reducing the possibility of the experiment being impacted by
the water used. The methylene blue powder was weighed on a digital scale for an amount of .32
grams to prepare the methylene blue solution. This amount was added to 100 ml of water for a
molarity of .001. Then, in a one-liter volumetric flask, three milliliters of the .001 M methylene
blue solution were added with distilled water until the one-liter mark was met. The concentration
of the methylene blue had to be diluted for changes to be easily observed. A piece of parafilm

Research Sample A 9 of 32
DYE ADSORPTION

9

was then placed on top of the container’s opening to
distribute the powder evenly by turning the container
upside down. This solution was then stored under a fume
hood away from light.
2. Preparing the coffee grounds
The preparation for both forms of coffee starts the same.
Coffee grounds were used due to their accessibility, and
when researching carbon/activated carbon, few studies
showed coffee grounds as its carbon source (Mutalib et
Figure 2 Methylene Blue Solution

al., 2025). To obtain used coffee grounds for the

experiment, spent coffee must be made. Spent coffee is coffee that has been used to make brewed
coffee. To have consistency in the experiments, the same coffee beans were used and freshly
ground before the brewed coffee was made. The coffee beans used in the experiments were of
Guatemalan origin and roasted between December 2024 and January 2025. The brewed coffee
was prepared using the French press method. Each batch of brewed coffee used 80 grams of
coffee beans that were ground in an electric coffee bean grinder for 30 seconds. Then, they were
added to a French press, and hot water was poured onto the grounds until water fully covered
them; they were left to sit for 15 seconds. After 15 seconds, a liter of hot water was added to the
French press and covered with the French press top. The coffee was left to sit for 5 minutes.
After 5 minutes, the plunger was slowly pushed down to separate the brewed coffee from the
grounds. The brewed coffee was then poured out until there was no liquid left in the French
Press. Then, the French press plunger was removed from the container. To the French press
container, three folded Bounty paper towels were added on top of the coffee grounds and then
pressed down with the plunger to absorb any excess moisture left in the grounds. This was left to

Research Sample A 10 of 32
DYE ADSORPTION

10

sit for 5 minutes. After 5 minutes, the coffee grounds were removed and evenly distributed on a
ceramic plate. The next step in the coffee preparation process is the drying process. Most
research conducted on drying organic materials for activated carbon used drying ovens, but this
study used a microwave for the method of drying (Mutalib et al., 2025). This experiment used a
standard home microwave oven with a power output of 1000 watts. The plate was placed in the
microwave for a total of 15 minutes, stopping every 3 minutes to move around the coffee
grounds. Once the coffee grounds were in the microwave for 15 minutes, they were removed
from the plate and placed in an airtight container. This was the last coffee preparation step for the
experiments that used loose ground coffee. For future experimentation, consistency measures
with the temperature of coffee should be recorded after
microwaving to ensure that the microwave is producing similar
heat.
3. Preparation of the Coffee Pellets
Half of the experiments conducted used a “pellet” form of
dried coffee. Unlike the regularly microwaved coffee grounds,
Figure 3 Dried Coffee Grounds

the coffee pellets are combined with ground flax seeds. Ground
flax seeds with water form a gel-like consistency, which aids

the pellets in staying intact. Flax seeds also have a composition of 60% carbon. The pellets are
with a ratio of approximately 1:2:2, one part flax seed, two parts microwaved coffee grounds,
and two parts distilled water. Each batch of pellets made for the experiments was made with 24
grams of ground flax seeds, 45 grams of microwaved coffee grounds, and 50 milliliters (ml) of
distilled water. In a mixing bowl, the ground flax seeds and microwaved coffee grounds (MCG)
were combined. Once everything was fully combined, the distilled water was added until a soillike consistency was reached. When pinched, the mixture was able to hold its shape. To form the

Research Sample A 11 of 32
DYE ADSORPTION

11

pellets, a silicone mold with mini cavities of the dimensions 0.5-inch diameter and 0.31-inch
height was used. The mixture was added to the mold, with each cavity being pressed down. The
molds then go through the same microwaving process described in section two. After
microwaving, the pellets were stored in an airtight container.
4. Experiments with Loose Ground Coffee (LGC)
In total, 12 trials utilized the LGC method. Each experiment had 4 trials, with the following
three being the experiments: 10 grams of LGC in 100 ml
of methylene blue solution for 20 minutes, 5 grams of
LGC in 100 ml of methylene blue solution for 20
minutes, and 10 grams of LGC in 100 ml of methylene
blue solution for 10 minutes. The basis of each
experiment was composed of coffee being added to
methylene blue solution, mixed for a consecutive amount
of time with a magnetic stirrer. To a 250 ml beaker, 100
ml of methylene blue solution was added along with a
stir bar. A stir bar is a tiny magnet that attracts to the
magnetic plate to stir a solution evenly. Once the beaker

Figure 4 Coffee Pellets

is set up, it is placed on top of the magnetic stirrer. The
magnetic stirrer was turned on to a setting where the solution had a whirlpool that was strong
enough to stay consistent but not so strong that the center of the whirlpool touched the bottom of
the flask. Once the whirlpool was made, the designated amount of LGC was added and left to stir
for 10 or 20 minutes, depending on which experiment was being conducted. After the time for

Research Sample A 12 of 32
DYE ADSORPTION

12

each experiment passed, the magnetic stirrer was turned off,
and the solution was ready for filtration.
5. Experiments with Pellet Coffee
For the twelve experiments using pellet coffee, the only
change was the structure of the coffee. Instead of adsorbing
the textile dye using LGC, these experiments used a
structured coffee pellet form. Each experiment had 4 trials
with the following three being the experiment: 10 grams of
Figure 5 Loose Coffee Grounds in
Methylene Blue Solution

coffee pellets in 100 ml of methylene blue solution for 20
minutes, 5 grams of coffee pellets in 100 ml of methylene

blue solution for 20 minutes, and 10 grams of coffee pellets in 100 ml of methylene blue solution
for 10 minutes. The same setup is used as described in section 4, except for the LGC being
exchanged for pellet coffee.
6. Filtration Process
For all the trials conducted, the same filtration process
was used. After each trial, a coffee filter filtered the solution
into an empty beaker. The coffee filters used in the
experiments were the Melitta Super Premium Coffee Filters.
To set up the filtration containers, the coffee filters were
placed on top of the beaker opening in a funnel shape for the
liquid to pass through. Once the filter was added to a beaker,

Figure 6 Coffee Pellets in Methylene Blue
Solution

Research Sample A 14 of 32
DYE ADSORPTION

14

could analyze. To have a reference in the spectrophotometer, a cuvette was filled with distilled
water and placed into the spectrophotometer to measure as a reference. The concentration curve
dilutions were the only liquids measured at the same time. After creating a reference in the
spectrophotometer, each dilution was placed in a cuvette using a pipette and transported into the
spectrophotometer to measure its red, green, and blue values. This same process occurred for
each of the 24 trial solutions after filtration. The spectrophotometer works by putting light
waves through the solution at different frequencies, so that the values that are being absorbed by
a given solution can be recorded (LabXChange). For example, the original solution that was
analyzed is blue to the human eye, and blue light wavelengths can pass through a blue solution,
making it look blue to humans. On the contrary, red-light wavelengths cannot pass, so it is
absorbed by the solution. A blue substance will record a high red value and a low blue value in
the spectrophotometer. This study had the goal of removing blue dye from a solution; therefore,
the final expected values in the spectrophotometer were low red values and high blue values.
Discussion
For each of my trials, I used a spectrophotometer to analyze the differences in the solution
after they were treated with a form of coffee. Spectrophotometry allowed me to quantify the
changes in the solutions color. While the data I collected included three colors, I focused on
interpreting the changes in the R values before and after treatment, as shown in Table 2. The
highest recorded value in the original Methylene Blue solution is the red value because a blue
solution will reflect blue light but will absorb red light. Therefore, the higher the red value
recorded, the bluer the solution appears. Each of the six experiments recorded a red value under
half of the original recorded value. The data in Table 3 shows the averages of all experiments. In
each category, there was no major difference between pellet and ground coffee as a form of dye

Research Sample A 15 of 32
DYE ADSORPTION

15

removal, but 5 grams of ground coffee stirred in the methylene blue solution for 20 minutes did
have the lowest recorded red value. In all, the coffee grounds were able to remove 73% to 89%
of the methylene blue dye from water. To determine if the experiments were statistically
significant, two ANOVA tests were performed. An ANOVA test allows for a comparison of the 7
categories in the study to determine if there was statistical significance between the means of
each experiment or if the differences were from random chance. The first test compared the six
experiments to the control, which was the untreated methylene blue solution. In comparison, the
change in the red values recorded after treatment shows that the treatments were statistically
significant with a p value < 0.001, as shown in Appendix H. The second test was to determine if
there was any significant difference in outcomes with the different experiment setups. In this
case, the differences among the six experiments were not statistically significant. This result was
unexpected because it was hypothesized that the pellets would be more effective at removing dye
from water. It was hypothesized that the pellet coffee would result in lower red values, but there
is no statistical difference; therefore, the hypothesis is rejected. Although the changes were not
drastic, they can still be observed in Figures 7 and 9. The tint in Figure 7 from treatment with
loose coffee grounds seems opaque in comparison to the solution treated with coffee pellets. In
addition to comparing the red values, observations were made with the filtration process. It was
noticed that the LGC was significantly more difficult to remove from the solution than the pellet
coffee was. Removing the coffee pellets from the solution was easier than removing the loose
coffee grounds, and it took less time. In some trials with the loose coffee grounds, the solution
needed to be filtered twice because some particles could still fall through the filter, but this did

Research Sample A 16 of 32
DYE ADSORPTION

16

not occur with the pellets. Therefore, even though there is no
statistical difference between the coffee pellets and the loose coffee
grounds, the coffee pellets are more practical for dye removal
because they are easier to filter. The conditions of this study also
could not distinguish other conditions that could have made the
adsorption process “ideal,” but if optimal conditions could be
studied and identified, then the use of coffee pellets could be an
efficient method to treat wastewater on a large scale. The pellets
can remove dye from water at a fast rate and do not require

Figure 9 Solution After Treatment
with Five Grams of Coffee Pellets
for 20 Minutes

extensive filtration processes.
1. Limitations
The study faced limitations in its setup due to materials, factors that were not recorded, and,
most notably, the fact that it is a theoretical approach to adsorbing dye from polluted bodies of
water. Only three colors absorbed by the solutions were able to be recorded with the schoolprovided spectrophotometer, but in a well-funded lab, a spectrophotometer can be able to record
light absorbances at different wavelengths, not just three colors. The lab was also conducted
without considering factors that could also impact results, such as the temperature of the coffee
grounds when they were microwaved, the temperature of each solution, the pH of each solution,
and the use of flasks that were not sterilized. These factors could have impacted the results of
each trial in some way, as studies such as Bawa’s have been able to find conditions that make
activated carbon dye adsorption optimal, such as having a pH of 2 (Bawa et al., 2023). Finally,
the dye solution used was not wastewater. Polluted waters, such as the Dravyavati River in India,
are impacted by multiple toxins, not just dyes like methylene blue. The solution used in this

Research Sample A 17 of 32
DYE ADSORPTION

17

study was highly controlled compared to river water that is polluted with wastewater. The
wastewater is composed of several dyes, acids, salts, and metals, something that cannot be easily
created artificially. The water in the rivers is also impacted by climate and local flora.
2. Implications
The research currently available on dye adsorption using carbon focuses mainly on how
carbon can adsorb dye once it is activated, but the research presented in this paper uses the
example of how a carbon source that is not activated can still remove dye from water. The source
of carbon used was also intentional. Coffee grounds are the waste of an entire industry. In every
corner of the world, there are coffee shops that dispose of coffee grounds daily because they do
not have a use for them. Coffee is also an accessible form of carbon because it can be accessed
within residential and commercial areas. Therefore, when applied to a large cycle of repurposing
spent coffee grounds to use them in dye removal, the grounds can keep up with the quantity
needed to remove dye from polluted bodies of water. One of the experiments in this study used a
ratio of 1:20, which implies that lower quantities can be studied in the future to determine if they
can still be effective at removing dye with less mass. The implication of this research shows that
sources of carbon, like coffee, do not need to be activated to remove dye. Knowing that nonactivated carbon can be effective at removing dye, future research can be directed toward
optimizing conditions for efficiency. By using coffee grounds as the source of carbon and not
activating it, most of the costs of activated carbon are removed. The coffee grounds can be
obtained from the mass waste of coffee grounds produced in coffee shops worldwide, making it
accessible. Because dye pollution is the result of costs that dyehouses do not want to have in
processing water, the low-cost alternative of using coffee grounds to remove dye from water can
be used for future development in recycling the water used to dye clothing, so it does not get

Research Sample A 18 of 32
DYE ADSORPTION

18

disposed of in bodies of water. Once future studies can determine which conditions can make a
nonactivated source of carbon the most efficient at dye removal, then engineering can be used to
design a circular use of dye water.
Although lab results show that this method, as it is now, is effective at removing dye, the
transition to using it as an industrial treatment must also be tested and observed. The coffee used
in this study is single origin, but on a large-scale treatment system will most likely rely on
grounds from different areas with different processing methods.

Table 1 Red, Green, and Blue Values for Each Concentration

Research Sample A 19 of 32

Table 3: Average Value of Each Experiment Compared to the Concentration Curve Values

Table 2: Average Values of Each Experiment

Research Sample A 20 of 32
DYE ADSORPTION

20

Conclusion
Spent coffee grounds can be a low-cost alternative to treating dye-polluted water. Not
having to activate the coffee grounds removes most of the costs because the coffee grounds do
not need to be processed with an acid or base, and the coffee itself is a byproduct of a beverage
that over half of Americans consume daily. Considering the implications of non-activated coffee
grounds as a low-cost method of dye removal, further studies can be done on the properties of
treated water and the conditions of the treatment. The results identified in this paper only show
the visual and numerical changes of one dye solution that has been treated with coffee grounds.
This study only looked at absorbency and color changes, but when applied to dye wastewater,
other factors must be considered, such as different pollutants in the water. Factors not observed in
this study could also be researched to determine how efficiency can be obtained with a material
that is not chemically processed. Results with stronger accuracy can be obtained by doing
experimentation with bodies of water from areas where clothing is made, as well as identifying
the type of coffee grounds used to treat the water and the dyes present in water polluted with
runoff from dyehouses. The mentioned accuracy of coffee grounds as dye removal can also be
researched with quantifiable factors such as pH and temperature.

Research Sample A 21 of 32
DYE ADSORPTION

21

References

Abdul Mutalib, A. A., Jaafar, N. F., Miskam, M., & Shafie, S. (2023). Comprehensive
functionality analysis of spent coffee grounds activated using a microwave-assisted
method. Journal of Dispersion Science and Technology, 46(1), 72–87.
https://doi.org/10.1080/01932691.2023.2278495
Bawa, I. G. A. G. et al. (2023). Combined absorbent of corn husks and eggshells activated by
sodium hydroxide as an adsorbent for Remazol Yellow FG dye in textile waste. Journal of
Applied and Natural Science, 15(4), 1582 - 1586.
https://doi.org/10.31018/jans.v15i4.5124
Berhane, H. (2024, April 26). Rethinking clothing consumption: understanding the human cost of
fast fashion. Retrieved April 27, 2025, from UNC Policy:
https://universitypolicy.unc.edu/news/2024/04/26/rethinking-clothing-consumptionunderstanding-the-human-cost-of-fast-fashion/
Beyer, K. (2024). “The adsorption of methylene blue by activated carbon from spent coffee
grounds by microwave-induced phosphoric acid activation.” Winona State University.
Retrieved April 27, 2025, from https://openriver.winona.edu/rca/2024/schedule/31/
By analyzing the absorption spectrum of the bright blue dye, researchers gain valuable insights.
(n.d.) LabXchange. Retrieved April 27, 2025, from
https://www.labxchange.org/library/items/lb:LabXchange:df4ebab4:html:1#:~:text=By%
20analyzing%20the%20absorption%20sp

Research Sample A 22 of 32
DYE ADSORPTION

22

Chen, X., Memon, H. A., Wang, Y., Marriam, I., & Tebyetekerwa, M. (2021). Circular Economy
and Sustainability of the Clothing and Textile Industry. Materials Circular
Economy, 3(1), 12. https://doi.org/10.1007/s42824-021-00026-2
Elks, J. (2013). Polluting paradise: Gap, Ince among companies exposed in Indonesian toxic
water scandal. Retrieved April 27, 2025, from Sustainable Brands:
https://sustainablebrands.com/read/polluting-paradise-gap-inc-among-companiesexposed-in-indonesian-toxic-water-scandal
Hsu, C. (2018, August 27). This bright blue dye is found in fabric. Could it also power batteries?
Research shows that the chemical, a component of wastewater in textile-making, is good
at tasks associated with energy storage. University at Buffalo News. Retrieved April 27,
2025, from https://www.buffalo.edu/news/releases/2018/08/026.html
Letsiwe Mabuza, N. S.-P. (2023, April 4). Natural versus synthetic dyes: Consumers'
understanding of apparel coloration and their willingness to adopt sustainable
alternatives. Retrieved April 27, 2025, from ScienceDirect.
Mersal, M. E., Kuok, K. K., Rahman, M. R., Chan, C. P., Bin Bakri, M. K., Chowdhury, M. D.
A., and Patwary, M. A. M. (2024). Effect of activated carbon compaction on water
filtration efficiency. BioResources 19(3), 5300-5315.
Mogavero, T. (2020, April 16). Clothed in Conservation: Fashion & Water. Retrieved April 27,
2025 from FSU: https://sustainablecampus.fsu.edu/blog/clothed-conservation-fashionwater
Mustapha, O. R., Osobamiro, T. M., Sanyaolu, N. O., & Alabi, O. M. (2023). Adsorption study of
Methylene blue dye: an effluents from local textile industry using Pennisteum pupureum

Research Sample A 23 of 32
DYE ADSORPTION

23

(elephant grass). International Journal of Phytoremediation, 25(10), 1348–1358.
https://doi.org/10.1080/15226514.2022.2158781
Nealon, S. (2025, March 21). Researchers advance efforts to turn spent coffee grounds into food
packaging. Retrieved April 27, 2025, from Oregon State University News Room:
https://news.oregonstate.edu/news/researchers-advance-effort-turn-spent-coffee-groundsfoodpackaging#:~:text=An%20estimated%2060%20million%20tons,methane%2C%20a
%20potent%20greenhouse%20gas.
Niinimaki, K. (2021, August 30). From fast to slow: how to construct a better balance in the
fashion system. Retrieved April 27, 2025, from Georgetown Journal of International
Affairs: https://gjia.georgetown.edu/2021/08/30/from-fast-to-slow-how-to-construct-abetter-balance-in-the-fashion-system/
P. Santhosh, A. S. (2013). Studies on the removal of acid blue 25 from wastewater using activated
carbon and turmeric (curcuma longa L.) as adsorbent . Retrieved April 27, 2025, from
Nature Environment and Pollution Technology : https://neptjournal.com/uploadimages/NL-42-24-24.pdf
Pujol, D., Liu, C., Gominho, J., Olivella, M. À., Fiol, N., Villaescusa, I., & Pereira, H. (2013).
The chemical composition of exhausted coffee waste. Science of the Total Environment,
463-464, 858–866.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2013.06.029
Ranson, B. (2020). The true cost of colour: The impact of textile dyes on water systems.
Retrieved April 27, 2025, from Fashion Revolution:
https://www.fashionrevolution.org/the-true-cost-of-colour-the-impact-of-textile-dyes-onwater-systems/

Research Sample A 24 of 32
DYE ADSORPTION

24

Regan, H. (2020, September 28). Asian rivers are turning black. And our colorful closets are to
blame. Retrieved April 27, 2025, from CNN: https://www.cnn.com/style/article/dyeingpollution-fashion-intl-hnk-dst-sept/index.html
Stacey, N. (2024). Buy Now! The Shopping Conspiracy. Netflix. Retrieved April 27, 2025, from
https://www.netflix.com/lu-en/title/81554996
Statistics Kingdom. (n.d.). ANOVA calculator - One way ANOVA and Tukey HSD test. Retrieved
April 27, 2025, from https://www.statskingdom.com/180Anova1way.html
The Rana Plaza disaster ten years on: what has changed? (2023, April). Retrieved April 27,
2025, from International Labour Organization: https://webapps.ilo.org/infostories/enGB/Stories/Country-Focus/rana-plaza#intro
Vellayati Hajad, H. I. (2024). Unveiling the political impact of fast fashion consumption: the role
of lower middle class in environmental crisis in Indonesia? Jurnal Wacana Politik, DOI:
10.24198/jwp.v9i2.49065.

Research Sample A 25 of 32
DYE ADSORPTION

25

Appendix
Appendix A
I.
Chart of All Trials and the Corresponding Data

Research Sample A 26 of 32
DYE ADSORPTION

Appendix B
I.
Data from Standard Ground Trials

26

Research Sample A 27 of 32
DYE ADSORPTION

Appendix C
I.
Data from 5 Grams 20 Minutes Ground Trials

27

Research Sample A 28 of 32
DYE ADSORPTION

Appendix D
I.
Data from 10 Grams 10 Minutes Ground Trials

28

Research Sample A 29 of 32
DYE ADSORPTION

Appendix E
I.

Data from Standard Pellet Trials

29

Research Sample A 30 of 32
DYE ADSORPTION

Appendix F
I.

Data from 5 Grams 20 Minutes Pellet Trials

30

Research Sample A 31 of 32
DYE ADSORPTION
Appendix G
I.

Data from 10 Grams 10 Minutes Pellet Trials

31

Research Sample A 32 of 32
DYE ADSORPTION
Appendix H
I.

ANOVA Test Data and Chart

32

AP RESEARCH 2025 • SCORING COMMENTARY

Academic Paper
Note: Student samples are quoted verbatim and may contain spelling and grammatical errors.
Overview
NEW for 2025: The question overviews can be found in the Chief Reader Report on Student Responses on
AP Central.
Sample: A
Score: 5
This paper earns a score of 5. The introduction discusses the real-world significance of the study,
grounded in background research, culminating in the paper’s narrow research focus on p. 3: “To
contribute to the objective of a low-cost dye adsorption method, this study researched the efficiency
of coffee grounds as a form of dye adsorption in loose and compacted forms.” The literature review
beginning on p. 3 places scholarly sources in conversation with each other to provide a logical line
of reasoning defending the research gap detailed on p. 6: “few studies…have researched whether
carbon without chemical activation can be used as a dye adsorbent.” This discussion culminated in
the hypothesis “that there will be a significant difference between the solution that is treated with the
compacted coffee and the solution treated with loose coffee. Compaction will make the separation
process more efficient because extensive filtering is not needed, which saves time, making it an efficient
method of dye adsorption that uses a throwaway product” (p. 6). The study’s implications are a natural
extension of this discussion, “If further research is conducted on the impact of activation and compaction
with spent coffee grounds as a form of dye removal, then companies can be more inclined to incorporate
a water treatment method that does not revolve around waste disposal” (p. 6).
The paper’s method on pp. 6-14 is comprehensive, clearly explained, and provides sufficient detail to
replicate the experiment. Research design choices, including the use of coffee grounds as a non-activated
carbon source, drying and compaction, and dye absorption, are well defended using relevant background
research (e.g., see pp. 7-10 Mutalib et al., 2023 and Mersal et al., 2024 references). As such, the rich
description and design choice defense clarifies the alignment between the research focus and the
method.
The results are presented and discussed on pp. 14-16 and provide a logical progression to the research
conclusions and implications. See p. 15: “In all, the coffee grounds were able to remove 73% to 89%
of the methylene blue dye from water,” p. 16: “Therefore, even though there is no statistical difference
between the coffee pellets and the loose coffee grounds, the coffee pellets are more practical for dye
removal because they are easier to filter,” and p. 20: “Spent coffee grounds can be a low-cost alternative
to treating dye-polluted water. Not having to activate the coffee grounds removes most of the costs
because the coffee grounds do not need to be processed with an acid or base, and the coffee itself is a
byproduct of a beverage that over half of Americans consume daily. Considering the implications of nonactivated coffee grounds as a low-cost method of dye removal…” The implications are fully explained
within the context of prior research and potential real-life applications.

© 2025 College Board.

Visit College Board on the web: collegeboard.org.	

AP RESEARCH 2025 • SCORING COMMENTARY

Academic Paper (continued)
The paper does not overstate its conclusions in that the conclusion limitations are acknowledged and
discussed on p. 16. See the hypercritical discussion of how the controlled experiment varied from real
life (e.g., use of clean vs. actual samples of polluted river water) and prior research design conditions
(e.g., pH conditions). For example, on p. 16: “These factors could have impacted the results of each trial
in some way, as studies such as Bawa’s have been able to find conditions that make activated carbon dye
adsorption optimal, such as having a pH of 2 (Bawa et al., 2023).”
This paper does not earn the score of a 4 because the conclusions are aligned to a narrow, focused
research goal and justified via a progression of logical inquiry choices. The limitations and implications
are detailed and fully explained within the context of prior research. The paper makes many choices that
enhance the communication, for example by explaining technical procedures (e.g., “The concentration
curve allowed for comparison between the original solution and the treated solutions.. p. 13; discussion
of spectrophotometer wavelength analysis on p. 14) and including pictures of process to guide the
discussion through the method.

© 2025 College Board.

Visit College Board on the web: collegeboard.org.	

