2025

AP Research
Academic Paper
®

Sample Student Responses
and Scoring Commentary

Inside:
Sample C
☑5 Scoring Guidelines
☑5 Student Samples
☑5 Scoring Commentary

© 2025 College Board. College Board, Advanced Placement, AP, AP Central, and the acorn logo are registered trademarks of
College Board. AP Capstone is a trademark owned by College Board. Visit College Board on the web: collegeboard.org.
AP Central is the official online home for the AP Program: apcentral.collegeboard.org.

AP® Research 2025 Scoring Guidelines

Academic Paper

5 Points

Report on Existing Knowledge

Report on Existing Knowledge
with Simplistic Use of a Research
Method

Score of 2

Score of 3

Ineffectual Argument for a New
Understanding

Well-Supported, Articulate
Argument Conveying a New
Understanding

Score of 4

Score of 5

• Presents an overly broad topic of
inquiry.

• Presents a topic of inquiry with
narrowing scope or focus, that is
NOT carried through either in the
method or in the overall line of
reasoning.

• Carries the focus or scope of a
topic of inquiry through the
method AND overall line of
reasoning, even though the focus
or scope might still be narrowing.

• Focuses a topic of inquiry with
clear and narrow parameters,
which are addressed through the
method and the conclusion.

• Focuses a topic of inquiry with
clear and narrow parameters,
which are addressed through the
method and the conclusion.

• Situates a topic of inquiry within
a single perspective derived from
scholarly works OR through a
variety of perspectives derived
from mostly non-scholarly works.

• Situates a topic of inquiry within
a single perspective derived from
scholarly works OR through a
variety of perspectives derived
from mostly non-scholarly works.

• Situates a topic of inquiry within
relevant scholarly works of
varying perspectives, although
connections to some works may
be unclear

• Explicitly connects a topic of
inquiry to relevant scholarly
works of varying perspectives
AND logically explains how the
topic of inquiry addresses a gap.

• Explicitly connects a topic of
inquiry to relevant scholarly
works of varying perspectives
AND logically explains how the
topic of inquiry addresses a gap.

• Describes a search and report
process.

• Describes a nonreplicable
research method OR provides an
oversimplified description of a
method, with questionable
alignment to the purpose of the
inquiry.

• Describes a reasonably replicable
research method, with
questionable alignment to the
purpose of the inquiry.

• Logically defends the alignment
of a detailed, replicable research
method to the purpose of the
inquiry

• Logically defends the alignment
of a detailed, replicable research
method to the purpose of the
inquiry.

• Summarizes or reports existing
knowledge in the field of
understanding pertaining to the
topic of inquiry.

• Summarizes or reports existing
knowledge in the field of
understanding pertaining to the
topic of inquiry.

• Conveys a new understanding or
conclusion, with an
underdeveloped line of reasoning
OR insufficient evidence.

• Supports a new understanding or
conclusion through a logically
organized line of reasoning AND
sufficient evidence. The
limitations and/or implications, if
present, of the new
understanding or conclusion are
oversimplified.

• Justifies a new understanding or
conclusion through a logical
progression of inquiry choices,
sufficient evidence, explanation
of the limitations of the
conclusion, and an explanation of
the implications to the
community of practice.

• Generally communicates the
student’s ideas, although errors
in grammar, discipline-specific
style, and organization distract or
confuse the reader.

• Generally communicates the
student’s ideas, although errors
in grammar, discipline-specific
style, and organization distract or
confuse the reader.

• Competently communicates the
student’s ideas, although there
may be some errors in grammar,
discipline-specific style, and
organization.

• Competently communicates the
student’s ideas, although there
may be some errors in grammar,
discipline-specific style, and
organization.

• Enhances the communication of
the student’s ideas through
organization, use of design
elements, conventions of
grammar, style, mechanics, and
word precision, with few to no
errors.

• Cites AND/OR attributes sources
(in bibliography/ works cited
and/or intext), with multiple
errors and/or an inconsistent use
of a discipline specific style.

• Cites AND/OR attributes sources
(in bibliography/ works cited
and/or intext), with multiple
errors and/or an inconsistent use
of a discipline specific style.

• Cites AND attributes sources,
using a discipline-specific style (in
both bibliography/works cited
AND intext), with few errors or
inconsistencies.

• Cites AND attributes sources,
with a consistent use of an
appropriate discipline-specific
style (in both bibliography/works
cited AND intext), with few to no
errors.

• Cites AND attributes sources,
with a consistent use of an
appropriate discipline-specific
style (in both bibliography/works
cited AND intext), with few to no
errors.

Score of 1

Rich Analysis of a New
Understanding Addressing a Gap
in the Research Base

© 2025 College Board

Research Sample C 1 of 39
1 

Mirror,  Mirror on the Wall…Who Is the Fairest of Them All?
A Content Analysis of Disney,s Animated and Live Action Villains
word count: 5352

Research Sample C 2 of 39
2
Introduction
My research project aims to explore the question: "Does Disney' s depiction of villains in
animated fairytales' compared to their live-action remakes' impact Gen Z,s perceptions of beauty
standards? Known and loved worldwide' Disney continues to shape cultural and social norms
through their fairytale creations. With unique visuals' Disney has set standards around beauty'
morality' and character designs observed in classic children fables. This project dives into how
these representations reinforce or reshape beauty standards (B.S.) perceived in two distinct media
formats: animated and live action. In order to conduct this experiment' I will be performing a
content analysis. Several evaluations will take place in this investigation' primarily focusing on
specific visual and character design elements (V.C.D.E.s) such as color schemes' facial features'
and body images. The V.C.D.E.s will be analyzed alongside measures of perceived attractiveness
to understand how adaptations of Disney,s fairytales influence viewers, reactions. Here' the
target audience is Generation Z' as many grew up with Disney,s animated films and now have
been recaptured with the live-action versions. However' the viewers do not necessarily have to
be enthusiasts; they can simply be individuals who are decently acquainted with Disney' which I
define to be true if they previously watched more than two fairytale animations and/or know of at
least half of the villain characters that will appear in this study.
With this being said' my project will concentrate on only well-known Disney narratives
that have been adapted into live action films' since these are the most visually impactful. I
hypothesize that the animated villains will be more exaggerated and reflect negative V.C.D.E.s to
a greater extent' while the live action variants will attempt to humanize characters' allowing for a
nuanced portrayal of B.S. in media. Furthermore' due to these alterations' I believe Gen Z will
find the live action versions more attractive.

Research Sample C 3 of 39
3
Significance
Live-action remakes are on the rise, transforming how classic stories are experienced by
modern viewers. When audiences are deeply attached with the original animated versions, the
stakes to meet, or even exceed those demands are high. In fact, a journal on the analysis of
adaptations published by English Professor Rebecca Rowe dives into how viewers "desire
adaptations to remain true in different ways and matching those expectations can be
complicated (Rowe, 2018). For this reason, understanding how these adaptations influence
perceptions, particularly in terms of B.S. and morality, is critical.
My research can offer valuable insights for not only media analysts but for content
creators hoping to construct remakes that resonate with Gen Z. One of the many aspects that are
difficult to replicate are visuals, especially when they are at the forefront of films. No matter how
subtle the visual alterations are, they can potentially shift how a character is perceived or
remembered. These details may play a larger role in audience perception than what creators
initially anticipate.
Literature Review
Disney and Media's influence on Beauty Standards
Dating back to 1923, Walt and Roy Disney founded the renowned Walt Disney Company
which quickly reconstructed the animation industry with the debut of Mickey Mouse (1928) and
their first feature-length movie, snow White and the seven D warfs (1937) (Gabler, 2006). Over
the decades, Disney has crafted numerous blockbuster films and is slowly, but surely, segueing
its way into live action. As these adaptations become increasingly prevalent, so does Disney's
reach and power to shape beauty standards (B.S.). B.S are defined as socially composed ideals
that determine what is accepted as desirable or attractive in appearance, commonly associated

Research Sample C 4 of 39
4
with femininity ( French, 2024). However, for the objective of this research, B.S will be used as a
gender-neutral term, recognizing that these perceptions affect all individuals. Scholars debate
that the artistic portrayal of heroes and villains remarkably correlate with B.S, connecting
physical appearance to moral alignment. Meagher and Neal at the Department of Psychology,
Hanover College, emphasize that children develop associations between specific facial
characteristics and personalities. Their research discovered that animated heroes were signified
with softer, rounder, and lighter features while the villains demonstrated more exaggerated and
angular features ( Meagher and Neal). In contrast, a study posted in The Journal of Social and
Media-a peer-reviewed platform dedicated to commentary and analysis on media's impacthighlighted how Disney's visual storytelling follows traditional B.S. In other words, Disney
lacks a wide range of "race, skin tone, and hair length. Nevertheless, the experts conclude that
there is no significant difference in B.S and body images between the villains and heroes
( Silalahi et al., 2023). On a similar note, expert in psychology, Micheal B. Lewis discusses
broader implications of the link between race and attractiveness. He addresses how media often
marginalizes diverse appearances, conditioning the audience to find Eurocentric B.S more
appealing ( Lewis, 2011). The uncertainty surrounding whether or not B.S. are disobeyed for
villains is a crucial foundation that needs to be understood before analyzing the effects on
audiences. Hence, I will be conducting a series of tests incorporating the experts' methods, as
well as my own, to set the groundwork for Disney's bias with B.S. towards villains.
The Role of Live Action Remakes
Live action adaptations have long opened the world of Disney to new dynamics. The
media portrayal of live action drastically differs from animated art styles, presenting
opportunities to challenge or preserve established standards. Often, audiences form attachments

Research Sample C 5 of 39
5
and admirations for specific actors and actresses. Furthermore' a psychology professor and
researcher duo declare that once these feelings develop' it can influence their perceptions of
reality' which affects how individuals react to solely the characters ( Gardner and Knowles'
2008). The study explores how characters are seen as more authentic and relatable when they see
a real' human face' rather than the animated stories which has unlimited creativity. Due to these
aspects' many critics state that "the remakes do not have the same impact or magical elements
that were previously captured in the animated features ( Hassan' 2020). This emotional
interference challenges traditional B.S. by providing a complex portrayal of characters beyond
just visuals. Likewise' scholars in media and social science elaborate how differentiating the
character from the actor is difficult. More often than not' "an actor who is perceived to play a
positive character will be associated with positive personality traits' whereas "playing a
negative character more likely leads to a misattribution of negative personality traits ( Koban et
al.' 2021). The relationship between the actor and the character is highly linked' and even one
change influences how the other is viewed. Many researchers have analyzed how audiences'
opinions of characters personalities change depending on the actor playing them and vice versa.
However' there is not much research on how the actors may challenge the B.S. originally placed.
With this being said' I aim to answer how in the context of Disney's villains to examine if live
actions will continue the trend of altering audience reactions' when B.S. representations are
being tested.
Generation Z and Media Influence
Pew Research Center defines Generation Z as "anyone born from 1997 onward
( Dimock' 2019). Over the years' Gen Z has become highly infatuated with digital media. Like
anyone' they too are tied with nostalgic content from childhood' including Disney classics. Sage

Research Sample C 6 of 39
6
J

'

-

'

G
'
 (C

C

' 2023). M

'

G

'

'

.
'
D

G
-

P

'
.I

P D

M

C

'C

'

MD

'
 (C
G

.' 2023). M

'

'
.M

'
'

.

I

'

B. .

'
.
C

D

.C.D.E.

D

E

 ( .C.D.E. )

.I

'
B. .

.C

'
 (
'

'

/

.' 2023).
.I

Research Sample C 7 of 39
7
larger context, these B.S. mirror cultural biases about attractiveness. On the other hand,
Buchegger, under the supervision of Assistant Professor of Philosophy Stefan Brandt, analyzed
how Disney's heroes are often animated with soft, symmetrical features that align with their
morality (Buchegger, 2020). Here, she focused on the simplification of good and evil, where
heroes are represented with features aligning with B.S. and villains showcase the opposite.
Despite these findings, Wellman, an expert on communication findings, takes a different, more
global perspective and explores how different cultures may use character designs. Her research
dived into the color aspect of V.C.D.E.s and how one color "may be viewed positively in Eastern
cultures, Western cultures could see it negatively (Wellman, 2020). Her approach emphasizes
that varying cultures offer different cues to convey what fits B.S. These studies closely resemble
my research method and tackle how V.C.D.E.s serve as significant element that needs to be
researched to recognize the impact it has on the perception of a character.
Call To Research
Thus, this research project will investigate how Disney's animated and live action
depictions of villains affect Gen Z's perceptions of B.S. and morality. Though several studies
have concentrated on the animated villains, there is limited information about how Disney's
representations in newer formats impact B.S. By analyzing these portrayals, my study assists in
examining whether or not the pattern observed in animated formats continue in live action films.
Understanding this shift is essential in comprehending how visual cues influence evolving beauty
ideals, especially when Gen Z engages with both media formats.
Methodology
Overview

Research Sample C 8 of 39
8
My method consists of 4 main steps: 1) analyze visual and character design elements,
V.C.D.E.s, for eight Disney villains in both animated and live action media formats, 2) compare
and contrast both media format results, 3) survey and record audience perceptions of B.S in both
media formats, and lastly 4) examine the correlation between differences in V.C.D.E.s in (2) and
Gen Z's reactions.
Sampling
In this study I analyzed eight Disney villain characters: Captain Hook, Maleficent, Jafar,
Ursula, Gaston, Cinderella's stepsisters_named Anastasia and Drizella, which I counted as one
villain since they often are seen on-screen together, but later collected data separately_, Shan
Yu, and Cruella. These characters were chosen not only because they are known worldwide, but
more specifically due to the fact that there are only a handful of live action remakes. Up until
2024, Disney has created as many as 21 live action remakes of their classics ("All 21, n.d). Of
these 21 films, only 14 movies consist of villains that are categorized as human, not including
sequels or animations that repeat villains. The list of 21 was narrowed since I steered away from
antagonists who were categorized as animals, inanimate objects, or anything else not classified
as a human. This choice was made in caution to potential disagreements about B.S that could
arise when considering non-human features, as well as to avoid controversiality of individuals
who would agree to find characters not-of-human nature, attractive. Though it may seem
contradicting, I did keep Ursula in the list of villains analyzed as she is half human and is seen to
turn full human for part of the film, The  Little Mermaid, to satisfy her evil intentions. Next, from
the reduced list of 14, the most popular fairytale adaptations were picked, leaving eight Disney
fairytale remakes to be analyzed with their animated counterparts to make up my qualitative
data.

Research Sample C 9 of 39
9
Once the list of films was decided' I established criteria to ensure consistency and
validity in the images I analyzed for each antagonist. First and foremost' each image chosen had
to' at the very least' clearly show the characters torso and up. This was crucial as body features
were significantly relevant to the study when I evaluated the villain's attractiveness. Moreover'
the selection had to incorporate the character' free of distracting objects or backgrounds that
stand out more than the individual themselves. Additionally' the image could not include any
other character_with the exception of animals or pets that are essential to the villain's
description_as they could influence the viewer's opinion. Furthermore' to avoid unnecessary
bias' images where the antagonists' expression was distorted or exaggerated were excluded. I did
not regard smiling or smirking as an example of "distorted or "exaggerated. If twisted
expressions were included' viewers' impressions could have been based off the images present'
misrepresenting the characters' allure. With that in mind' the face also had to be at least threequarters visible' guaranteeing a comprehensive view of their features' maintaining accuracy and
impartiality in this study.
Analyzing V.C.D.E.s
After I established the images that can be used for each of the eight villains' I analyzed all
individually with 4 structured trials' each focusing on a specific characteristic: 1)  hairstyle' 2) 
body shape' 3)  facial symmetry' and 4)  actor popularity.
First' for hairstyles' I conducted a direct visual comparison between the animated and live
action format of each antagonist. This comparison involved qualities such as hair style and
length' in order to understand how certain changes_if any_influence audience perception of
appearance as whole.

Research Sample C 10 of 39
10
For body shape, my guideline was mainly the "golden ratio concept. Many surgical
professionals agree that for males, broad shoulders tapering into a narrow waist, creating a Vshaped torso, signifies an "attractive body. On the other hand, the golden ratio for females
entails an hourglass proportion where they have a balanced bust-to-hip ratio coupled with a
defined waist (Singh et al., 2018). Considering the above, I compared each character to the
golden ratio as it allowed for a quantifiable approach to body shape comparison between both
media formats.
Next, facial symmetry was examined by using an online AI tool called Face Symmetry
Test. This tool allowed for several numerical values of the symmetry of facial features, which
gave a systematic comparison between animated and live action faces. Originally, I was going to
use the AI tool PinkMirror, however, it went extremely in-depth with its numerical outputs. I
believed it took away from the purpose of this research to see the overall perceived attractiveness
rather than simply the facial symmetry. Therefore, I fixated on the Face Symmetry Test
application which gave mouth, nose, eye, chin, and overall symmetry values. These digits served
as quantitative data that showed which media format displayed more symmetry, where a larger
number is equivalent to higher symmetry.
Lastly, I considered the popularity of the actors or actresses that were casted to play the
roles of the live action portrayals. Numerous times, viewers do not separate the person from the
character, essentially influencing their opinion of solely the character. Hence, I assessed the actor
or actress's reputation by researching their social media following, award nominations, and ratio
of films they had main roles in vs supporting roles. This helped uncover the role of external
factors in shaping audience perceptions of B.S and acceptance of live-action designs.
Surveying

Research Sample C 11 of 39
11
During this period of time' to gather quantitative data on audience perceptions of
animated vs live action depictions' I also designed and dispersed a Google Forms survey
targeting Gen Z' specifically those born between 2000 and 2010. This demographic was favored
since those born before 2000 may lean closer to millennial perspectives' and those born after
2010 may be too young to provide meaningful insights. The range of individuals between 2000
and 2010 supply relevant trends in B.S as they are familiar with both animated classics and their
live action remakes' offering an ideal representation of Gen Z. Additionally' this survey was
limited to Central Indiana residents. Deciding otherwise would be unrealistic due to logistical
restraints and practicality of gathering samples. Based on statistics compiled from Census
Reporter' approximately 100'000 individuals reside between the three locations in Indiana and
any small towns nearby. I deduced this value by finding the total population in these
whereabouts' then calculating the portion that is Gen Z in those locations and lastly adding the
totals in each city to get a round figure of my target audience. I settled for the percents of the
populations ranging ages 10-29' instead of 14-24' as Census Reporter did not differentiate ages
for my designated audience range. However' this was not an issue since the larger number
accounts for individuals residing in nearby towns that were not specifically calculated' therefore'
leveling the sample size. (Appendix A).
Target audience  = Total population x Population by age range percent
Once this value was determined' I decided_with a 5% margin error and at a 90% confidence
interval_that roughly 260 responses would provide a reasonable representation of the
population (Sample Size Calculator).
Furthermore' my survey followed a consistent format. Before anything else' the
beginning of the survey provided a clear consent page outlining the purpose of the survey and

Research Sample C 12 of 39
12
how someone's information would be used. I prioritized the respondent's anonymity and
voluntary participation by taking no personal identifying info' other than gender' as well as
giving the option to opt out at any given moment. Following this' I had a few preliminary
questions to ensure the individuals answering my survey fit the criteria to have meaningful
insights. From here' there were 16 photos of the villains_eight animated and eight live action_
lined up asking the respondents if they found them attractive. I sent this survey to friends' family'
posted it around the school' and posted on social media. From there' individuals sent to others
they knew to spread awareness.
Examining Correlation of Different Media Formats and Gen Z's Perception of B.S
Ultimately' once both the qualitative and quantitative data were sampled' I analyzed the
findings from the survey alongside the V.C.D.E.s. This process involved cross-referencing the
survey feedback consisting of numerous opinions and biases with results from the visual
comparisons. By doing so' I intended to identify the pattern and correlation between a specific
media format and how Gen Z reacts to B.S represented in it.
Results and Data A nalysis
This section examines my collected data to compare physical attributes of animated and
live action Disney villains. Results are displayed in five sub-sections where the first four are
reserved for each of the V.C.D.E.s' and the fifth for the survey findings. Each individual data set
is directly followed by analysis and interpretation.
Hairstyle
To assess whether a specific character exhibits a modern hairstyle that Gen Z is
accustomed to' I gathered samples of popular trends for both male and females in recent years
 (Appendix B). These were chosen as they were prevalent among social media stars' celebrities'

Research Sample C 13 of 39

Research Sample C 14 of 39

Research Sample C 15 of 39

Research Sample C 16 of 39
16

On the other hand, results for males demonstrated that animated designs are easier to
exaggerate shoulder-to-waist proportions. I noticed that live action designs tended to prefer a
realistic takes on the characters' bodies but maintained the ideal. This is seen within the male
data, where 3/4 live action designs reflected the ratio, while only 2/4 did for the animated
designs. 3/4 characters were modified when adapted into live action movies, two of which were
to conform to the ideal standards, and one that fell below. The rest were kept consistent despite
the format.
Facial Symmetry
To maintain consistency and accuracy for my facial symmetry data, I selected images
where the character's face was clearly visible. I defined visible to be where at least two-thirds of
the face is showing. Additionally, I preferred images where the characters do not make extreme
and/or exaggerated faces that may disrupt results concocted by the AI tool,
FaceSymmetryTest.com. I chose an external tool to avoid personal bias towards results
(Appendix E).
Facial Symmetry Results
Results from overall symmetry show that 6/9 characters displayed higher balance in the
live action formats as opposed to their animated counterparts. Such numbers illustrated a distinct
trend where the live action adaptation converted to a more proportionate and symmetrical
features; in fact, this was contrary to my theory of how the results could come out. I believed that
animated characters would have higher symmetry due to the creator's ability to morph the
designs however they wished. However, according to the results, it seems as though creators
used that element to their advantage to produce conventionally unattractive individuals. On the

Research Sample C 17 of 39
17
contrary, live action works modernized their versions and emphasized aesthetically pleasing
standards.
Actor/Actress Popularity
Here, I examined the popularity, if any, of celebrities in live action adaptations through three
critical categories: number of awards won, social media following, and main-to-supporting role
ratio  (Appendix F). I determined that for a celebrity to be classified as "popular, they need to
meet at least two of the three parameters above. This accounts for particular situations where, for
example, a highly recognizable individual, like Brad Pitt, chooses to remain private, which
skews the significance of not meeting a popularity category. Additionally, to "meet a category,
the individual has to be greater than or equal to the median of the corresponding category. I
preferred the median instead of the mean since the latter is often skewed by extreme values,
while the former is a more balanced representation for this particular situation.
 Body Shape Results

1.

Research Sample C 18 of 39
18

2.

3.

Findings revealed that the following 4/9 celebrities qualified as popular since they
satisfied at least two categories: Angelina Jolie ( Maleficent), Luke Evans ( Gaston), Melissa
McCarthy ( Ursula), Emma Stone ( Cruella). The fact that almost half of the actors passed the
popularity test demonstrates that live actions films have an external influence that shapes how
audiences view the characters; one that animated versions do not. In fact, several researchers
have previously established that "viewers can be involved with an actor and their fictional
characters simultaneously ( Koban et al., 2021). This trend aligns with Disney's adaptations,
especially since they introduce pre-existing fan biases and expectations, shifting how characters
are perceived.

Research Sample C 19 of 39
19
Survey
Participants were asked for their preferences between animated and live action visuals
through a Google Forms survey (Hussain, 2025). This form took on a style of a "Hot or Not
quiz, a familiar game popular among Gen Z. I chose this format to increase the likelihood of
engagement since studies posted in the American Association for Public Opinion Research reveal
that individuals are more likely to respond when the topics are found to be interesting (Groves, et
al., 2004). Though the research is outdated, the fundamental principles of how psychology
impacts human actions still pertains to modern society. Furthermore, its effects were proved
when my survey exceeded my estimated value, gathering 267 responses (Appendix G).
Survey R esults
Results showed that within the animated format, 7/8 characters_Captain Hook,
Maleficent, Jafar, Gaston, Ursula, Anastasia & Drizella, and Cruella_received a "NO. by over
50 % of individuals, showing participants' adamant rejection to find the visuals appealing. This
was observed in only three of the live actions characters. On the other hand, the live action
format revealed that 3/8 characters_Captain Hook, Maleficent, and Cruella_received a "YES
by over 50 % of individuals, while zero reflected this pattern in the animated format. Neither
format illustrated preference of the average expression, "Kind of, shown by the fact that less
than 30 % of individuals chose this option for a majority of characters; Instead, participants
drifted towards one of the two extreme options. Due to these results, it is clear that live action
characters were generally seen as more attractive. The fact that no animated characters received a
majority in "YES, while a handful did for the live action remakes, demonstrates a change in
dynamic between format perceptionU+2026but why?

Research Sample C 20 of 39
20
 Correlation and  Conclusion
Upon a deeper analysis, a strong positive correlation between characters rated as more
attractive within the survey and those who modeled modern V.C.D.E.s in the live action format
emerged. Among the V.C.D.E.s measured, facial symmetry and actor popularity presented itself
to be the most impactful in determining who received a "YES instead of a "NO. in the survey.
Majority of the live action characters were displayed with more symmetrical facial
features in contrast to their animated counterparts. Symmetry was one parameter that changed
nearly all live action individuals towards more typical B.S of balanced features; these same
characters tended to score significantly higher on attractiveness. Fo instance, villains such as
Cruella and Jafar had more than a 15% increase in overall symmetry. Both also showed more
than a 10% increase in survey responses saying "YES, signifying a positive direct correlation.
Additionally, body shape played a subtle but important role. Though the films attempt to
accurately represent costume designs to the authentic animated designs, they still reflect fit,
hourglass or V-shaped figures that are commonly idealized in modern media. Maleficent was
seen to be the most drastic change due to appearances in several costumes, two of which made
drastic body shape changes from the regular, classic cape that hides her silhouette. Moreover, this
live action character received the second highest "YES responses. The others were subtle shifts,
almost all becoming slightly closer or above, rarely below, the ideal ratios in contrast to the
original ratios observed in animated formats.
Furthermore, actor popularity served as a significant factor. Remarkably, over half the
villains who switched from "NO. to "YES when going from animated to live action format
were portrayed by widely recognized actors. This suggests an unconscious projection that

Research Sample C 21 of 39
21
viewers cast onto a character. Here , fame itself became a design choice , increasing appeal and
attractiveness despite the character being played , showing a strong correlation between the two.
Finally , hairstyles also mattered. Villains who exhibited modern hairstyles tended to score
higher on the survey; a trend that was more prominent among the males. It has long been said
that hair is a man's makeup. Characters like Captain Hook and Shan Yu embodied this phrase ,
especially since their ratings for "YES more than doubled in their live action formats compared
to animated formats.
Everything considered , the correlation implies that live action depictions not only
modernize Disney's designs but intentionally shift physical traits towards B.S accepted by Gen Z
audiences. The transformation represents a cultural shift towards aesthetic visuals in villains.
Media today often emphasizes beauty , giving these villains more than just their evil personality ,
which may cause audiences to sympathize with their actions. What we see can often coincide
with what we feel , and this intersection between beauty and morality moves storytelling away
from the typical black-and-white plot. My findings contribute to how different visual formats can
influence Gen Z's perceptions of B.S and morality. However , there are limitations to consider.
First of all , though I attempted to choose a diverse sample of villains , it is a small pool of
characters in terms of what Disney has to offer. Second , finding images where each character
was facing forward in a clear , observable format was more difficult than pre-determined. This
acted as a challenge especially during symmetry analyzation where particular images had no
other choice than to be scanned with angles or imperfect quality. Additionally , when assessing
actor popularity , external factors_such as a celebrity not having social media due to personal ,
private reasons_made it difficult to provide concrete , objective evidence to support their fame.
Nevertheless , the findings still reveal meaningful patterns. As Disney and other popular studios

Research Sample C 22 of 39
22
continue to recreate characters with attractive features, society may gradually merge what they
see and feel. This has implications not just for entertainment and media, but for how young
audiences internalize B.S and form emotional connections with morally flawed characters.
Future research can explore a wider range of characters as animations increasingly become
adapted into live action films, analyze global perspectives from a cultural point of view, and even
examine different media formats_for example, TikTok trends and edits_to see who truly is the
fairest of them all.

Research Sample C 23 of 39
23
References
"

s  y

v

t

" (n.d.). Rotten Tomatoes.

s 

https://editorial.rottentomatoes.com/guide/all-disney-live-action-remakes-ranked/
Buchegger, L. (2020). "The Fairest One of All : Appearance and Body Images in Disney's
Feature Films Masterarbeit zur Erlangung des akademischen Grades Master of Arts (MA)
an der Karl-Franzens-Universit t Graz vorgelegt von. https://unipub.unigraz.at/obvugrhs/content/titleinfo/5378573/full.pdf
Cascio, C. N., et al. (2023). Effect of Technology and Digital Media Use on Adolescent Health
and Development: Protocol for a Multimethod Longitudinal Study. JMIR Research
Protocols, 12(1), e50984. https://doi.org/10.2196/50984
Chang, C.-W., & Chang, S.-H. (2023). The Impact of Digital Disruption: Influences of Digital
Media and Social Networks on Forming Digital Natives' Attitude. SAGE Open, 13(3).
https://doi.org/10.1177/21582440231191741
D, E. (2024a). t t s t s 

s t

s ty s . Medihair.

u

https://medihair.com/en/statistics-8-most-popular-male-hairstyles/
D, E. (2024b). t t s t s 

s t

u

s ty s . Medihair.

https://medihair.com/en/statistics-the-10-most-popular-female-hairstyles/
Dimock, M. (2019). Defining generations: Where Millennials end and Generation Z begins. Pew
Research Center. https://www.pewresearch.org/short-reads/2019/01/17/wheremillennials-end-and-generation-z-begins/
French, M. (2024). What Is the Connection between Beauty Standards and Mental health?
Medicalnewstoday.com; Medical News Today.
https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/beauty-standards-and-mental-health

Research Sample C 24 of 39
24
Gabler, N. (2023). Walt Disney: The Triumph of the American Imagination. Google.com.
https://books.google.com/books?id=41eRu0wRkEC&pg=PR4&source=gbs_selected_pages&cad=1# v=snippet&q=feature%20le
ngth%20&f=false
Gardner, W. L., & Knowles, M. L. (2008). Love Makes You Real: Favorite Television Characters
Are Perceived as "Real in a Social Facilitation Paradigm. Social Cognition, 26(2), 156168. https://doi.org/10.1521/soco.2008.26.2.156
Groves, R., et al. (2004). The Role of Topic Interest in Survey Participation Decisions. Public
Opinion Quarterly, 68(1), 2-31. https://doi.org/10.1093/poq/nfh002
Hassan, N. (2020). Disney's Live-Action Remakes: Progressive Rebranding or Remaking
Feminism? Medium. https://nuhahassan.medium.com/disneys-live-action-remakesprogressive-rebranding-or-remaking-feminism-2ff7eef271e7
Hussain, T. (2024). Hot or Not? Disney Villain Edition. Google Docs.
https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSdNPMmDiCWh7GyySQ2bZlMGS7neqa9cZPOS5H6P5x_BZMMBQ/formResponse
Koban, K., et al. (2021). Seeing characters in a different light: Psychological consequences of
actor-character mismatches for viewers' involvement in fictitious characters. Psychology
of Popular Media. https://doi.org/10.1037/ppm0000340
Lewis, M. B. (2011). Who is the fairest of them all? Race, attractiveness and skin color sexual
dimorphism. Personality and Individual Differences, 50(2), 159-162.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.paid.2010.09.018

Research Sample C 25 of 39
25
Meagher, K., & Neal, M. (n.d.). The Influence of Disney: The Effects of Animated Facial
Features on Children's Perceptions.
https://psych.hanover.edu/research/Thesis05/MeagherNeal.pdf
Rowe, R. (2018). "The More Accuracy the Better ? Analyzing Adaptation Reception in Reaction
Videos. Adaptation, 11(3), 193-208. https://doi.org/10.1093/adaptation/apx026
Silalahi, Rachel, et al. (2023). "Comparison of Beauty Standards and Body Images on Disney
Princesses and Female Villains. The Journal of Society and Media, vol. 7, no. 1, pp.
174-92, https://doi.org/10.26740/jsm.v7n1.p174-192.
Singh, P. et al. (2018). The Golden Ratio and A esthetic Surgery. Academic.oup.com.
https://academic.oup.com/asj/article/39/1/NP4/5115686
Wellman, N. (2020). Disney's Portrayal of Women: An Analysis of Female Villains and
Princesses. Concordia Journal of Communication Research Concordia Journal of
Communication Research, 7(4), 4.
https://digitalcommons.csp.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1029&context=comjournal

Research Sample C 26 of 39
26
Appendix A

Image
Fishers' IN

Calculation

Total

Target audience = Total
population x
Population by age
range percent

24'429
101 '789 x 0.24 =

Noblesville' IN

Target audience = Total
population x
Population by age
range percent

18'270
76 '124 x 0.24 =

Carmel' IN

Target audience = Total
population x
Population by age
range percent

29'606
102 '091 x 0.29 =

TOTAL

Total target audience =

= 72' 305 peopleU+2026

Target audience 1 +
Target audience 2 +
Target audience 3

people

100' 000

Research Sample C 27 of 39
27
Appendix B
Male

Popular Hair Trends in Recent Years

Female

Popular Hair Trends in Recent Years

Research Sample C 28 of 39

Research Sample C 29 of 39
29
Gaston

N/ A
→ Classic
pompadour with
a low ponytail

N/ A
→ Classic
pompadour with
a low ponytail

Shan Yu

N/ A
→ Partially
shaved with
long, loose hair

Long wavy hair
styled with a half
ponytail

Ursula

N/ A
→ Short, spiky
hair; styled
upward.

Hair has the volume and backward sweep of
a pompadour in the front, but it transitions
into a long, tied-back ponytail. While the
pompadour aspect is trendy, the low
ponytail makes it outdated by modern
standards. This style wouldn't be widely
accepted today, as men's ponytails are
usually worn higher or looser, and the
combo of pompadour + ponytail is rarely
seen.
Like the animated version, live-action
G aston's hair features a pompadour in the
front that flows into a low ponytail. In fact,
this style is very accurate to the animated
style. Similar to what has been said about
the animated, while the pompadour itself is
trendy, the addition of a low ponytail makes
it less common in modern society.
Shan Yu has a fully bald top with long,
unbound hair flowing from the sides. The
defining features are the completely bare
crown and the long, loose strands, which do
not align with any modern hairstyle trends.
This style would not be widely accepted
today as it is not only uncommon, but also
shies away from beauty standards, coming
off as unappealing.
He has naturally wavy, shoulder-length hair
with the top half pulled back into a ponytail,
while the rest flows freely. This style, while
not as popular, still fits modern trends.
However, the half-up styling leans more
historical and practical for battle rather than
a common everyday look. While long hair on
men is more accepted today, his specific
style is more rugged. He does not display
the same baldness seen in the animated
format, changing audiences' perceptions
quite a bit.
Her hair resembles a pixie cut because of its
short length, but it is styled upwards in a
spiky manner, which moves away from the
classic definition of a pixie cut. The spikes
give her a wilder and more chaotic look
rather than the softer, more feminine style
typically associated with pixie cuts.
Therefore, it does not match modern trends

Research Sample C 30 of 39

Research Sample C 31 of 39
3 1 
C ruella

N/A
→ short, spiky,
uneven/layered
bob

Blowout bob
with bangs

Her short and uneven/layered hairstyle is
half black, half white. While it resembles a
bob in length, the spiky texture and overall
rugged appearance does not fit the typical
wavy bob or any other popular hairstyles
from the list. This hairstyle is unique and
bold, making it less common in modern
society.
Her hairstyle is half black and half white hair
styled in a bob, similar to the animated
version. However, the live action version is
softer and fits the wavy/curly bob concept
as it has a similar length. Her specific color
choice is bold like the animated
representation. In fact, unnatural hair colors
are accepted among gen z so it does not
contribute negative views.

Research Sample C 32 of 39
32
Appendix D
Picture
Captain Hook

Maleficent

#1 young/fitted

#2 older/fitted

#3 older/coat

Jafar

Zoom

Upper
Body (cm)

Waist (cm)

Hip (cm)

Research Sample C 33 of 39

Research Sample C 34 of 39

Research Sample C 35 of 39

Research Sample C 36 of 39

Research Sample C 37 of 39
 3 7
A ppendix F

Research Sample C 38 of 39

Research Sample C 39 of 39

AP RESEARCH 2025 • SCORING COMMENTARY

Academic Paper
Note: Student samples are quoted verbatim and may contain spelling and grammatical errors.
Overview
NEW for 2025: The question overviews can be found in the Chief Reader Report on Student Responses on
AP Central.
Sample: C
Score: 4
This paper earns a score of 4. The research question is presented on p. 2: “Does Disney’s depiction of
villains in animated fairytales, compared to their live-action remakes, impact Gen Z’s perceptions of
beauty standards?” The topic of inquiry is focused, clearly communicated, and carried throughout the
method and conclusion. The topic is situated with a variety of relevant scholarly and authoritative works
about Disney, Gen-Z, and beauty standards/attractiveness on pp. 3-7. Connections between the sources
and their relevance to the research question are made throughout the literature review to defend a gap,
on p. 7: “Though several studies have concentrated on the animated villains, there is limited information
about how Disney’s representations in newer formats impact [beauty standards]. By analyzing these
portrayals, my study assists in examining whether or not the pattern observed in animated formats
continue in live action films.”
The choices within the method are logically defended on pp. 8-11. For example, p. 8 presents a defense
of the villains sample: “These characters were chosen not only because they are known worldwide,
but more specifically due to the fact that there are only a handful of live action remakes. Up until 2024,
Disney has created as many as 21 live action remakes of their classics (“All 21,” n.d). Of these 21 films,
only 14 movies consist of villains that are categorized as human, not including sequels or animations
that repeat villains.” The images used are defended on p.9, “First and foremost, each image chosen had
to, at the very least, clearly show the characters torso and up. This was crucial as body features were
significantly relevant to the study when I evaluated the villain’s attractiveness.” There are also several
other instances of the method being defended, including the actresses in the study and the survey
population.
The student’s new understanding is found on p. 20: “Upon a deeper analysis, a strong positive
correlation between characters rated as more attractive within the survey and those who modeled
modern V.C.D.E.s in the live action format emerged. Among the V.C.D.E.s measured, facial symmetry and
actor popularity presented itself to be the most impactful in determining who received a “YES” instead
of a “NO.” in the survey…. Furthermore, actor popularity served as a significant factor. Remarkably, over
half the villains who switched from “NO.” to “YES” when going from animated to live action format were
portrayed by widely recognized actors.” This new understanding is the result of a logically organized
line of reasoning on pp. 12-19. For example, regarding facial symmetry on p. 16, “Results from overall
symmetry show that 6/9 characters displayed higher balance in the live action formats as opposed to
their animated counterparts. Such numbers illustrated a distinct trend where the live action adaptation
converted to a more proportionate and symmetrical features; in fact, this was contrary to my theory of
how the results could come out.”

© 2025 College Board.

Visit College Board on the web: collegeboard.org.	

AP RESEARCH 2025 • SCORING COMMENTARY

Academic Paper (continued)
The student acknowledges ethical considerations on p. 12, “The beginning of the survey provided a
clear consent p. outlining the purpose of the survey and how someone’s information would be used. I
prioritized the respondent’s anonymity and voluntary participation by taking no personal identifying info,
other than gender, as well as giving the option to opt out at any given moment.”
This paper does not earn a score of 3 because the topic of inquiry is focused and narrow on “how
Disney’s animated and live action depictions of villains affect Gen Z’s perceptions of [beauty standards]
and morality” (p. 7). The research methods are replicable and aligned to the topic of inquiry, as
evidenced on pp. 8-12. The methods are thoroughly explained, detailed, and justified.
This paper does not earn a score of 5 because the implications to the field of knowledge on pp. 2122 are underdeveloped: “Nevertheless, the findings still reveal meaningful patterns. As Disney and
other popular studios continue to recreate characters with attractive features, society may gradually
merge what they see and feel. This has implications not just for entertainment and media, but for how
young audiences internalize [beauty standards] and form emotional connections with morally flawed
characters.” In addition, a lack of enhanced communication prevents this paper from earning a score of
5. Although some of the tables and graphs are labeled, they are not referenced in text. Thus, although the
communication is competent, the communication is not enhanced by the student’s design choices.

© 2025 College Board.

Visit College Board on the web: collegeboard.org.	

