2025

AP Research
Academic Paper
®

Sample Student Responses
and Scoring Commentary

Inside:
Sample I
☑5 Scoring Guidelines
☑5 Student Samples
☑5 Scoring Commentary

© 2025 College Board. College Board, Advanced Placement, AP, AP Central, and the acorn logo are registered trademarks of
College Board. AP Capstone is a trademark owned by College Board. Visit College Board on the web: collegeboard.org.
AP Central is the official online home for the AP Program: apcentral.collegeboard.org.

AP® Research 2025 Scoring Guidelines

Academic Paper

5 Points

Report on Existing Knowledge

Report on Existing Knowledge
with Simplistic Use of a Research
Method

Score of 2

Score of 3

Ineffectual Argument for a New
Understanding

Well-Supported, Articulate
Argument Conveying a New
Understanding

Score of 4

Score of 5

• Presents an overly broad topic of
inquiry.

• Presents a topic of inquiry with
narrowing scope or focus, that is
NOT carried through either in the
method or in the overall line of
reasoning.

• Carries the focus or scope of a
topic of inquiry through the
method AND overall line of
reasoning, even though the focus
or scope might still be narrowing.

• Focuses a topic of inquiry with
clear and narrow parameters,
which are addressed through the
method and the conclusion.

• Focuses a topic of inquiry with
clear and narrow parameters,
which are addressed through the
method and the conclusion.

• Situates a topic of inquiry within
a single perspective derived from
scholarly works OR through a
variety of perspectives derived
from mostly non-scholarly works.

• Situates a topic of inquiry within
a single perspective derived from
scholarly works OR through a
variety of perspectives derived
from mostly non-scholarly works.

• Situates a topic of inquiry within
relevant scholarly works of
varying perspectives, although
connections to some works may
be unclear

• Explicitly connects a topic of
inquiry to relevant scholarly
works of varying perspectives
AND logically explains how the
topic of inquiry addresses a gap.

• Explicitly connects a topic of
inquiry to relevant scholarly
works of varying perspectives
AND logically explains how the
topic of inquiry addresses a gap.

• Describes a search and report
process.

• Describes a nonreplicable
research method OR provides an
oversimplified description of a
method, with questionable
alignment to the purpose of the
inquiry.

• Describes a reasonably replicable
research method, with
questionable alignment to the
purpose of the inquiry.

• Logically defends the alignment
of a detailed, replicable research
method to the purpose of the
inquiry

• Logically defends the alignment
of a detailed, replicable research
method to the purpose of the
inquiry.

• Summarizes or reports existing
knowledge in the field of
understanding pertaining to the
topic of inquiry.

• Summarizes or reports existing
knowledge in the field of
understanding pertaining to the
topic of inquiry.

• Conveys a new understanding or
conclusion, with an
underdeveloped line of reasoning
OR insufficient evidence.

• Supports a new understanding or
conclusion through a logically
organized line of reasoning AND
sufficient evidence. The
limitations and/or implications, if
present, of the new
understanding or conclusion are
oversimplified.

• Justifies a new understanding or
conclusion through a logical
progression of inquiry choices,
sufficient evidence, explanation
of the limitations of the
conclusion, and an explanation of
the implications to the
community of practice.

• Generally communicates the
student’s ideas, although errors
in grammar, discipline-specific
style, and organization distract or
confuse the reader.

• Generally communicates the
student’s ideas, although errors
in grammar, discipline-specific
style, and organization distract or
confuse the reader.

• Competently communicates the
student’s ideas, although there
may be some errors in grammar,
discipline-specific style, and
organization.

• Competently communicates the
student’s ideas, although there
may be some errors in grammar,
discipline-specific style, and
organization.

• Enhances the communication of
the student’s ideas through
organization, use of design
elements, conventions of
grammar, style, mechanics, and
word precision, with few to no
errors.

• Cites AND/OR attributes sources
(in bibliography/ works cited
and/or intext), with multiple
errors and/or an inconsistent use
of a discipline specific style.

• Cites AND/OR attributes sources
(in bibliography/ works cited
and/or intext), with multiple
errors and/or an inconsistent use
of a discipline specific style.

• Cites AND attributes sources,
using a discipline-specific style (in
both bibliography/works cited
AND intext), with few errors or
inconsistencies.

• Cites AND attributes sources,
with a consistent use of an
appropriate discipline-specific
style (in both bibliography/works
cited AND intext), with few to no
errors.

• Cites AND attributes sources,
with a consistent use of an
appropriate discipline-specific
style (in both bibliography/works
cited AND intext), with few to no
errors.

Score of 1

Rich Analysis of a New
Understanding Addressing a Gap
in the Research Base

© 2025 College Board

Research Sample I 1 of 12
MINDFUL EATING: THE LINKS BETWEEN DIET AND MENTAL WELLNESS

1

Mindful Eating: The Links Between Diet and Mental Wellness: A Comprehensive Analysis

AP Research Studies
January 23, 2024

Word Count: 2766

Research Sample I 2 of 12
MINDFUL EATING: THE LINKS BETWEEN DIET AND MENTAL WELLNESS

2

Mindful Eating: The Links Between Diet and Mental Wellness
Introduction
In recent years, there has been a growing interconnection of the complex relationship
between one's diet and their mental health. Mental disorders currently affect millions worldwide,
and their prevalence is ever-growing. There is an urgent need for an approach to help those
suffering from mental health conditions, and among these approaches, diet has emerged as a
promising factor. The concept of dietary patterns is the overall composition and quality of an
individual diet, and how it is related to an individual's health outcomes. Numerous studies have
demonstrated the profound role of diet in physical health outcomes. They have solidified the
connection between diet and physical health, shown by the fact that diet can prevent and manage
chronic diseases, such as cardiovascular disease, diabetes, and obesity.
However, while much attention has been devoted to understanding the link between diet
and physical health, the influence of factors that differ from the norm has not been given much
consideration. Especially the often-overlooked factors of the influence of socioeconomic status
and cultural food preferences. Much of the existing research has neglected the diversity of
dietary habits and traditions found across different socioeconomic and cultural perspectives.
Despite the clear influence of socioeconomic and cultural factors on dietary patterns, there is a
clear gap in our understanding of how these differences translate into disparities in mental wellbeing. This gap is particularly concerning, as it limits the effectiveness of interventions aimed at
improving mental well-being. Therefore, there is a pressing need for research that examines the
health implications of different socioeconomic and cultural food choices, because by addressing
this gap there would be a more comprehensive understanding of the relationship between mental
well-being and diet.

Research Sample I 3 of 12
MINDFUL EATING: THE LINKS BETWEEN DIET AND MENTAL WELLNESS

3

Review of Literature
Background
In order to carefully consider the complex intercorrelation between diet, nutrition, and
mental health, it is vital to examine the existing literature on this topic. It is also important to
define the key terms. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), a specialized agency
of the United Nations, a person who is obese has a body mass index (BMI) greater than or equal
to 30. The WHO also defines mental health as a state of mental well-being that enables people to
cope with the stresses of life.
Research has established a link between diet and physical health. For example this study
from Nardocci and others, who are scholars from the University of Montreal, Department of
Nutrition. They conducted a cross-sectional study where they estimated the ultra-processed food
intake of 19,363 Canadian adults and then assessed whether or not they were obese. They found
that ultra-processed foods made up almost half of the daily calories consumed by Canadian
adults. This research establishes the relationship between the consumption of ultra-processed
“unhealthy” foods and obesity. Obesity has been linked to numerous health issues, which implies
that the consumption of ultra-processed food has a link to health issues, confirmed by their
results that individuals in the highest quintile of ultra-processed food consumption were 32%
more likely to be obese as compared to individuals in the first quintile.
In this article, researchers from the Clinical Nutrition Department at Imam Abdulrahman
Bin Faisal University found a link between food, mood, and diseases. They thoroughly
investigated diabetes mellitus, obesity, and depression and concluded that a person's mood
affects their food choices, and their food choices affect their mood. This will be helpful with my
research because it is evidence that food does affect the brain.

Research Sample I 4 of 12
MINDFUL EATING: THE LINKS BETWEEN DIET AND MENTAL WELLNESS

4

In this article, researchers who specialize in psychology are researching the topic of food
addiction. They are trying to determine whether or not food addiction should become a valid
diagnosis, and they found that areas of the brain that are responsible for executive functioning
(for example: attention or decision-making) experience the same sensations with drug addiction,
as they do with proposed food addiction. Drug addiction is considered a brain disorder because it
changes the brain’s circuits. Drug addiction is a psychological issue, and this research suggests
that food addiction could also be a psychological issue.
This article explores the influence of gut microbiota on brain function and behavior and
discusses the communication between the gut and the brain. The researchers highlight studies
that link alterations in gut bacteria to changes in mood, cognition, and mental health. The article
emphasizes microbiome research, and its possibilities for treating neurological disorders and
mental health conditions.
This article explores the connection between the diets and mental health of a young adult
population of college students in the Appalachian region. They found that students in this region
face challenges such as low fruit and vegetable intake, high added sugar consumption, and a
significant amount of people experiencing food insecurity. Their findings suggest that addressing
food insecurity and promoting healthier diets could be crucial for improving the mental wellbeing of college students in the Appalachian region.
This article is a review of the research on the relationship between nutrition and
depression, given depression being the psychiatric condition with the greatest economic, social,
and healthcare burden on developed nations. They found that healthy dietary practices are
associated with reduced symptoms of depression, they did not find a clear answer to what exactly
contributes to this effect. The research focuses on age groups such as adolescents, adults, and

Research Sample I 5 of 12
MINDFUL EATING: THE LINKS BETWEEN DIET AND MENTAL WELLNESS

5

older people. The study recommends further research in order to establish a more conclusive link
between diet and depression.
In this article, a doctor from Harvard Medical School explains the effects of the quality of
the food you eat on your brain, and ultimately your mood. They explain how when people have
diets that contain a lot of processed or refined foods, the brain has a hard time getting rid of
them. They reported that the risk of depression is reportedly 25% to 35% lower in those who
follow more ‘traditional’ diets, such as Mediterranean or Japanese diets, compared to ‘Western’
diets. These traditional diets are high in a rich intake of vegetables, fruits, unprocessed grains,
and fish; as well as modest amounts of lean meats and dairy
In this article, the author discusses the growing significance of formulating diets to
impact gut health in industries where animals are fed with formulated feed. He explains how
antibiotics are not allowed in feed and the effects it has on human gut health. He also cites
reports that explain that chickens consume a lot of their bedding material.
In this article, the author explains the role of inflammation as a potential mediator
between diet and mental health, emphasizing the need for further research in this area. He
highlights the need for large-scale, population-based studies to better understand the complex
relationships between diet, mental health, and various demographic/environmental factors. This
article emphasizes the need for more research in the field of nutritional psychiatry, which
investigates the links between diet, nutrition, and mental health.
This article discusses research that indicates a potential link between the gastrointestinal
tract and the central nervous system in anxiety-like behaviors. They found this from testing
certain probiotic formulations, such as those containing Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium,
which demonstrate loosening effects on the central nervous system in both humans and rodents.

Research Sample I 6 of 12
MINDFUL EATING: THE LINKS BETWEEN DIET AND MENTAL WELLNESS

6

This article is a review of 51 other studies that examined the connection between food
addiction and mental health symptoms and measured food addiction using the Yale Food
Addiction Scale (YFAS). They found significant correlations between food addiction, binge
eating, depression, and anxiety. They concluded that a positive relationship exists between food
addiction and mental health symptoms.
In this article, researchers studied the dietary intake, nutritional knowledge, and food
addiction among 16-25-year-olds who attend community mental health services. The results
from 30 participants showed that 43% of energy intake came from energy-dense, non-nutritious
foods; which is higher than the recommended limit of <15% and the general population levels of
35%. They conclude that unhealthy dietary patterns were prevalent in the early stages of mental
illness, which could cause potential risks for future physical health.
In this article, researchers propose that highly processed foods have pharmacokinetic
properties, the same seen in addictive drugs. These properties show a concentrated dose and
rapid rate of absorption because of the rapid rate at which refined carbohydrates are absorbed
into the system, indicated by glycemic load. They explain how addictive substances are rarely in
their natural states, and how all foods are not addictive, they give the example of vegetables and
cake.
This article explains the impact of nutrition on human mental performance, and it
emphasizes the effects of food and fluid consumption. It specifically mentions the effects of
alcohol, caffeine, breakfast, lunch, meal composition, and glucose drinks on cognitive efficiency.
It explains that during meals, the proportion of protein to carbohydrate is related to brain
serotonin synthesis.

Research Sample I 7 of 12
MINDFUL EATING: THE LINKS BETWEEN DIET AND MENTAL WELLNESS

7

This study explains how substance abuse is common among people with mental
disorders, and how this is also the case for food addiction. They describe food addiction as a
phenotype characterized by an addiction-like attraction to predominantly highly processed foods
with a high content of refined carbohydrates and fat. They conducted a survey in Denmark with
5,000 people ages 18-62 and found that 23.7% met the criteria for food addiction, with the
highest prevalence observed in those with eating disorders.
This article explains how mental disorders amount to 13% of the global disease burden,
which surpassing cardiovascular and cancer burdens. It also explores the impact of diet on
mental health, and reveals links between Western diets and psychiatric symptoms. They found
that poor diets contribute to obesity, a risk for conditions like Alzheimer's. They conclude that
recognizing nutrition's role requires sustained efforts and policy acknowledgment for improved
mental health globally.
This article explains how food addiction proposes that people may experience an
addictive response to certain foods, such as those high in fat and refined carbohydrates. They
propose an alternative model to food addiction that suggests that it is a behavioral addiction,
triggered by the action of eating. They argue in favor of this model rather than the substancebased model because of the variations among different addictive foods.
In this study, researchers investigated food addiction within Australian adults using the
Yale Food Addiction Scale. These adults completed an online survey that collected information
including: demographics, dietary intake, depression, anxiety, stress and personality dimensions
including impulsivity, sensation seeking, hopelessness and anxiety sensitivity. They found that
those with severe food addiction had elevated odds of severe depressive symptoms, while higher
vegetable intake reduced the odds.

Research Sample I 8 of 12
MINDFUL EATING: THE LINKS BETWEEN DIET AND MENTAL WELLNESS

8

This article explains how the concept of food addiction is a highly debated topic and how
studies establish its links to obesity and disordered eating. They explain how the controversy is
due to it being defined in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, more
commonly known as the DSM-5. This review outlines current research that provides better
classification that differentiates it from an eating addiction and shows potential overlap with
eating disorders. They suggest that food addiction may be distinct from established eating
disorders, but more research would be required to develop a specific diagnosis.
This article describes how the addiction model of eating disorders and obesity is gaining
attention, but explains how the evidence from other studies challenges its validity. They explain
that it’s because of inconsistent evidence from various studies; the existence of commonalities in
brain reward processes between obesity and substance abuse is acknowledged by neurobiological
research, but there are big differences between these conditions that undermine the validity of the
claim.
World Health Organization. (2024). Obesity and overweight. World Health Organization.
https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/obesity-and-overweight
Methods
For my topic, I wanted to research something about dietary habits. So in my research, I
did a systematic review of the current research to familiarize myself with my topic. I figured that
American adolescents come from diverse backgrounds, which would influence their dietary
habits. Many teenagers will eat their families’ traditional foods because that is what is readily
available to them at home. Upon brief research, I realized that the primary focus on certain
demographic groups/ regions could generalize findings. In my research, I wanted to address this
gap and that would require research that includes populations from various backgrounds.

Research Sample I 9 of 12
MINDFUL EATING: THE LINKS BETWEEN DIET AND MENTAL WELLNESS

9

Throughout my research, I aimed to analyze the existing research on the relationship
between dietary patterns and mental well-being. The above evidence suggests significant
associations between dietary patterns and mental well-being, however, I found a gap where more
research is needed. I found that more research is needed to clarify the underlying mechanisms
and reasons for these relationships. I hypothesize that these relationships have underlying
reasonings that deal with the relationship between the person and the food they eat. These
relationships can be cultural, as many Americans belong to different cultures with different
traditional foods. These reasons can also be socioeconomic as many people are unable to afford
higher-quality foods. Many suggestions for healthy eating suggest foods that are not accessible to
certain individuals.

Conclusion
To conclude it is clear that the relationship between dietary patterns and mental wellbeing in adolescents is incredibly complex. Through my review of the literature, I have gained
valuable insight into the various factors that influence these relationships and their implications
for the mental well-being of adolescents. To help these individuals it is necessary to prioritize
research that addresses the gaps in the current research, and our understanding of the
mechanisms which underly the relationships between what you eat and how you feel.

Research Sample I 10 of 12
MINDFUL EATING: THE LINKS BETWEEN DIET AND MENTAL WELLNESS

10

References

AlAmmar, W. A., Albeesh, F. H., & Khattab, R. Y. (2020). Food and mood: The corresponsive
effect. Current Nutrition Reports, 9. 296–308. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13668-020-003313
Gordon, E. L., Lent, M. R., & Merlo, L. J. (2020). The effect of food composition and behavior
on neurobiological response to food: A review of recent research. Current Nutrition
Reports, 9, 75-82. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13668-020-00305-5
Nardocci, M., Leclerc, B. S., Louzada, M. L., Monteiro, C. A., Batal, M., & Moubarac, J. C.
(2019). Consumption of ultra-processed foods and obesity in Canada. Canadian journal
of public health: Revue canadienne de sante publique, 110(1), 4–14.
https://doi.org/10.17269/s41997-018-0130-x
Cryan, J. F., & Dinan, T. G. (2012). Mind-altering microorganisms: the impact of the gut
microbiota on brain and behaviour. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 13, 701-712.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn3346.
Wattick, R. A., Hagedorn, R. L., & Olfert, M. D. (2018). Relationship between diet and mental
health in a young adult appalachian college population. Nutrients, 10(8), 957.
https://doi.org/10.3390/nu10080957
Selvaraj, R., Selvamani, T. Y., Zahra, A., Malla, J., Dhanoa, R. K., Venugopal, S., Shoukrie, S.
I., Hamouda, R. K., & Hamid, P. (2022). Association between dietary habits and
depression: A systematic review. Cureus, 14(12). https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.32359

Research Sample I 11 of 12
MINDFUL EATING: THE LINKS BETWEEN DIET AND MENTAL WELLNESS

11

Selhub, E. (2022). Nutritional psychiatry: Your brain on food. Harvard Health.
https://www.health.harvard.edu/blog/nutritional-psychiatry-your-brain-on-food201511168626
Choct, M. (2009). Managing gut health through nutrition. British Poultry Science, 9-15.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00071660802538632
Jacka, F. N. (2017). Nutritional psychiatry: Where to next? EBioMedicine, 17, 24–29.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2017.02.020
Kane, L., & Kinzel, J. (2018). The effects of probiotics on mood and emotion. JAAPA, 31(5), 1–
3. https://doi.org/10.1097/01.JAA.0000532122.07789.f0
Burrows, T., Kay-Lambkin F., Pursey K., Skinner J., & Dayas C. (2018). Food addiction and
associations with mental health symptoms: A systematic review with meta-analysis.
Journal of Human Nutrition and Dietetics, 31(4), 544-572.
https://doi.org/10.1111/jhn.12532
Teasdale, S. B., Burrows, T.L., Hayes, T., Hsia, C.Y., Watkins, A., Curtis, J., & Ward, P. B.
(2019). Dietary intake, food addiction and nutrition knowledge in young people with
mental illness. Nutrition & Dietetics, 77(3), 315-322. https://doi.org/10.1111/17470080.12550
Schulte, E.M., Avena, N.M., & Gearhardt, A.N. (2015). Which foods may be addictive? The
roles of processing, fat content, and glycemic load. PLOS ONE.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0117959
Rogers, P., & Lloyd, H. (1994). Nutrition and mental performance. Proceedings of the Nutrition
Society, 53(2), 443-456. doi:10.1079/PNS19940049

Research Sample I 12 of 12
MINDFUL EATING: THE LINKS BETWEEN DIET AND MENTAL WELLNESS

12

Horsager, C., Færk, E., Lauritsen, M.B., Østergaard, S.D., Food addiction comorbid to mental
disorders: A nationwide survey and register-based study. International Journal of Eating
Disorders, 54(4), 545-560. https://doi.org/10.1002/eat.23472
Owen, L., & Corfe, B. (2017). The role of diet and nutrition on mental health and wellbeing.
Proceedings of the Nutrition Society, 76(4), 425-426. doi:10.1017/S0029665117001057
Schulte, E. M., Potenza, M. N., & Gearhardt, A.N. (2017). A commentary on the “eating
addiction” versus “food addiction” perspectives on addictive-like food consumption.
Appetite, 115, 9-15. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.appet.2016.10.033
Burrows, T., Hides, L., Brown, R., Dayas, C.V., & Kay-Lambkin, F. (2017). Differences in
dietary preferences, personality and mental health in australian adults with and without
food addiction. Nutrients, 9(3), 285.
Hauck, C., Cook, B., & Ellrott, T. (2020). Food addiction, eating addiction and eating disorders.
Proceedings of the Nutrition Society, 79(1), 103-112. doi:10.1017/S0029665119001162
Wilson, G.T. (2010). Eating disorders, obesity and addiction. European Eating Disorders
Review, 18, 341-351. https://doi.org/10.1002/erv.1048
World Health Organization. (2024). Obesity and overweight. World Health Organization.
https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/obesity-and-overweight

AP RESEARCH 2025 • SCORING COMMENTARY

Academic Paper
Note: Student samples are quoted verbatim and may contain spelling and grammatical errors.
Overview
NEW for 2025: The question overviews can be found in the Chief Reader Report on Student Responses on
AP Central.
Sample: I
Score: 1
This paper earns a score of 1. The research focus on p. 2 is an overly broad inquiry on the topic of
mindful eating and wellness. The research goal is stated on p. 2: “Therefore, there is a pressing need
for research that examines the health implications of different socioeconomic and cultural food choices,
because by addressing this gap there would be a more comprehensive understanding of the relationship
between mental well-being and diet.” The literature review on pp. 3-8 is a list of sources summarized in
isolation on topics that are broadly related to the research focus.
The method is stated on p. 8: “So in my research, I did a systematic review of the current research to
familiarize myself with my topic.” This continues on p. 9: “Throughout my research, I aimed to analyze
the existing research on the relationship between dietary patterns and mental well-being, , however, I
found a gap where more research is needed.” The paper does not present and discuss results. Instead
the paper’s method statement refers back to the review of literature on the previous pp. 3-8. The paper
states a broad conclusion on p. 9: “To conclude it is clear that the relationship between dietary patterns
and mental well-being in adolescents is incredibly complex.” A complete set of references is included.
However, the lack of in-text citations, and the consistent use of “this article explains” makes it difficult to
determine which sources were being referenced in the literature review.
This paper does not earn a score of 0 because the paper has a researchable topic, establishes a
connection between diet and wellness, and attempts a report on existing knowledge.
This paper does not earn the score of a 2 because while the method of “systematic review” is mentioned
on p. 7, it is not used. The statement of the method does not describe the steps in the systematic review,
nor does it give the criteria upon which the student selected the works to be analyzed, nor the analysis
criteria. The method then leads straight to conclusion, as results are not presented or discussed. As
such, the paper describes a search-and-report process on a broad topic.

© 2025 College Board.

Visit College Board on the web: collegeboard.org.	

