2025

AP Research
Academic Paper
®

Sample Student Responses
and Scoring Commentary

Inside:
Sample G
☑5 Scoring Guidelines
☑5 Student Samples
☑5 Scoring Commentary

© 2025 College Board. College Board, Advanced Placement, AP, AP Central, and the acorn logo are registered trademarks of
College Board. AP Capstone is a trademark owned by College Board. Visit College Board on the web: collegeboard.org.
AP Central is the official online home for the AP Program: apcentral.collegeboard.org.

AP® Research 2025 Scoring Guidelines

Academic Paper

5 Points

Report on Existing Knowledge

Report on Existing Knowledge
with Simplistic Use of a Research
Method

Score of 2

Score of 3

Ineffectual Argument for a New
Understanding

Well-Supported, Articulate
Argument Conveying a New
Understanding

Score of 4

Score of 5

• Presents an overly broad topic of
inquiry.

• Presents a topic of inquiry with
narrowing scope or focus, that is
NOT carried through either in the
method or in the overall line of
reasoning.

• Carries the focus or scope of a
topic of inquiry through the
method AND overall line of
reasoning, even though the focus
or scope might still be narrowing.

• Focuses a topic of inquiry with
clear and narrow parameters,
which are addressed through the
method and the conclusion.

• Focuses a topic of inquiry with
clear and narrow parameters,
which are addressed through the
method and the conclusion.

• Situates a topic of inquiry within
a single perspective derived from
scholarly works OR through a
variety of perspectives derived
from mostly non-scholarly works.

• Situates a topic of inquiry within
a single perspective derived from
scholarly works OR through a
variety of perspectives derived
from mostly non-scholarly works.

• Situates a topic of inquiry within
relevant scholarly works of
varying perspectives, although
connections to some works may
be unclear

• Explicitly connects a topic of
inquiry to relevant scholarly
works of varying perspectives
AND logically explains how the
topic of inquiry addresses a gap.

• Explicitly connects a topic of
inquiry to relevant scholarly
works of varying perspectives
AND logically explains how the
topic of inquiry addresses a gap.

• Describes a search and report
process.

• Describes a nonreplicable
research method OR provides an
oversimplified description of a
method, with questionable
alignment to the purpose of the
inquiry.

• Describes a reasonably replicable
research method, with
questionable alignment to the
purpose of the inquiry.

• Logically defends the alignment
of a detailed, replicable research
method to the purpose of the
inquiry

• Logically defends the alignment
of a detailed, replicable research
method to the purpose of the
inquiry.

• Summarizes or reports existing
knowledge in the field of
understanding pertaining to the
topic of inquiry.

• Summarizes or reports existing
knowledge in the field of
understanding pertaining to the
topic of inquiry.

• Conveys a new understanding or
conclusion, with an
underdeveloped line of reasoning
OR insufficient evidence.

• Supports a new understanding or
conclusion through a logically
organized line of reasoning AND
sufficient evidence. The
limitations and/or implications, if
present, of the new
understanding or conclusion are
oversimplified.

• Justifies a new understanding or
conclusion through a logical
progression of inquiry choices,
sufficient evidence, explanation
of the limitations of the
conclusion, and an explanation of
the implications to the
community of practice.

• Generally communicates the
student’s ideas, although errors
in grammar, discipline-specific
style, and organization distract or
confuse the reader.

• Generally communicates the
student’s ideas, although errors
in grammar, discipline-specific
style, and organization distract or
confuse the reader.

• Competently communicates the
student’s ideas, although there
may be some errors in grammar,
discipline-specific style, and
organization.

• Competently communicates the
student’s ideas, although there
may be some errors in grammar,
discipline-specific style, and
organization.

• Enhances the communication of
the student’s ideas through
organization, use of design
elements, conventions of
grammar, style, mechanics, and
word precision, with few to no
errors.

• Cites AND/OR attributes sources
(in bibliography/ works cited
and/or intext), with multiple
errors and/or an inconsistent use
of a discipline specific style.

• Cites AND/OR attributes sources
(in bibliography/ works cited
and/or intext), with multiple
errors and/or an inconsistent use
of a discipline specific style.

• Cites AND attributes sources,
using a discipline-specific style (in
both bibliography/works cited
AND intext), with few errors or
inconsistencies.

• Cites AND attributes sources,
with a consistent use of an
appropriate discipline-specific
style (in both bibliography/works
cited AND intext), with few to no
errors.

• Cites AND attributes sources,
with a consistent use of an
appropriate discipline-specific
style (in both bibliography/works
cited AND intext), with few to no
errors.

Score of 1

Rich Analysis of a New
Understanding Addressing a Gap
in the Research Base

© 2025 College Board

Research Sample G 1 of 13

People on the Internet are Mean; A content analysis study on how the design of video
games themselves plays a part in the most commonly used derogatory terms by its players.
Word count: 4964

Research Sample G 2 of 13

Literature Review:
Video games are becoming more and more prevalent as time goes on. According to
Exploding Topics, there are approximately 3.32 billion active video game players worldwide
(Duarte, 2025). In other words, roughly 40% of the entire world plays video games. With
something as popular as this, there needs to be a better understanding of how toxic
communication starts in order to make video games a safe space for everyone. To start us off,
what even are video games? My definition of a video game is a game played on an electronic
device of some sort. As technology continues to evolve, so too does the amount of video games
that exist in the world, so with that in mind, more research is needed on video games in general
in order to keep up with their evolution and ensure they remain a healthy way for people to spend
time. While there have been many studies over the last few decades with different results, such
as video games making kids more violent (Greitemeyer, 2019), or that they actually don’t do that
at all (Przybylski & Weinstein, 2019), it is safe to say that research into the field of video games
is highly debated and varied. Growing up on video games myself, I was always confused by the
news headlines that said video games made kids more violent/aggressive because I was one of
said kids and I did not feel any rise in either category. As I got older, I saw more papers come out
about how there is actually very little evidence to support this fact, and that while small increases
have been observed, it is nothing substantial (Przybylski & Weinstein, 2019). When thinking
about a research topic about video games, this whole field came to mind first because of its
prevalence in my childhood, but after doing the research I realize it’s already been explored by
much better technology than a highschooler could feasibly acquire. So, I want to focus my paper
on a different, but very similar topic. Rather than video games causing kids to take violent action
in real life, I want to study how (if any) do video games impact the behaviors taken in the game
itself by the players. Specifically, in multiplayer games with communication methods such as
voice chat and text messaging. Being around video games all my life, I’ve seen first hand the
people who go out of their way to insult somebody because of the sound of their voice, or their
perceived gender/race. Since they believe that there are no consequences to these actions, they
just hurl whatever hurtful things they can think of to make themselves feel better. Seeing these
actions online really rubbed me the wrong way, and when I heard we could do research on
whatever we want I knew I wanted to do research that had implications of helping others. So,
after thinking about it, why not combine my love for video games with research on how to make

Research Sample G 3 of 13

everyone feel comfortable playing video games. Because at the end of the day, that's what video
games are, games, and no one should feel unsafe or discriminated against in such an enjoyable
pastime that teaches many skills needed in life. Now you may be wondering, why do people even
say these hurtful things in the first place online? My research aims to find out why this is, is it
due to the video games themselves? An example being the story mode of the video game having
oversexualisation of characters which leads to the player base being more sexist. Or even the
game featuring lots of characters from a specific minority group which leads people to use
derogatory terms associated with those characters in the game. Or rather is it due to other factors
such as seeing people do it and not get punished? Through this research, I hope to provide
solutions/understanding to this problem in order to make our ever evolving digital landscape safe
for everyone to enjoy and feel comfortable being who they are. This problem is significant
because it is not just video games that are growing and growing as time goes on, other such
digital inventions like virtual reality are evolving to emulate the real world even more and
provide escape to people who want a break from real responsibilities. Another part of my
significance for this study is the fact that virtual reality becomes more developed by the day. As I
have stated already, technology will continue to evolve (presumably) and inventions like virtual
reality need to be safe places for everyone to be comfortable being who they are or what's the
point in even having them in the first place? Will virtual reality just turn into another life where
people are made fun of and called derogatory terms based on whatever they feel comfortable as?
I simply will not let this happen and that is why we need to start tackling this issue of derogatory
terms in video games now. I say this because in these digital worlds, even if people don’t think
they are real and that there are no consequences for saying whatever they want, we need to dispel
that idea and ensure these spaces are safe and welcoming for everyone who joins them. Even
putting aside digital aspects such as video games and virtual reality, many other aspects of digital
communication suffer from people thinking they can say whatever they want with zero
consequences. Some of these digital communication methods include comments on somebody’s
post, where since they aren’t saying what they are saying to the posts creator in real life, they feel
like they can get away with saying whatever they want. Usually this takes the form of insults on
whatever the person did, and as a society we cannot allow these poor communication behaviors
to continue, no matter the digital landscape they are used in, in order to properly evolve with the
evolution of digital communication methods.

Research Sample G 4 of 13

Method:
Moving onto what my actual research question is, I decided to go with “How do people
playing video games and the video games themselves spin society's acceptance/indifference
towards people being openly discriminatory towards minority groups in video games?” So, why
did I choose this question? Let's break it down. To start, we have how do people playing video
games spin society's acceptance/indifference about discriminatory terms being used. I chose this
wording because humans are very social creatures, and in that sense we tend to mimic others
behaviors that we think are good traits (even when they aren’t morally good). For example, if
someone sees a person say a derogatory term in a video game and get lots of laughs from the
people around them, they are likely to copy that term or even use a different one because they
want validation. Next, let's talk about the video games themselves spinning society's
acceptance/indifference towards people using derogatory terms in video games. As I stated
earlier, I hypothesize that game design and more importantly character design has a huge impact
on the words people call others in the game. This is because when you are playing online with
people you do not know, the only thing another person knows about you is your username and
what character you are. So, they either call you the characters name or your given username.
Now, if the other person is heated enough they might start trying to insult you, or at least what
they perceive you to be. Also known as what character you are playing at that time, which is why
I hypothesize that characters have a massive effect on what derogatory words people use to try
and be mean to others. The last thing I want to mention in my research question is the
acceptance/indifference bit because as I have mentioned, I play games all the time and see people
say the craziest things to zero reaction from others, almost like it is normal. I want to try and find
out why people are so desensitized to these obviously hurtful words and if both, neither, or either
the players playing the games and the games themselves play into this. Anyways back to the
actual research question answering, I plan to attempt to answer this question in a few different
ways. Firstly, I am going to use the content analysis method to analyze past papers that have
looked at certain discriminatory behaviors (such as sexism or racism) in certain games and then
put them in comparison with each other to glean any patterns or connections. I also plan to look
at papers that talk about the actual make of the games themselves and the different morals
portrayed to see to what extent those ideas can play on user communication behavior. Through

Research Sample G 5 of 13

this method, I can start building an understanding of why these hurtful behaviors exist across all
video games with these chats, not just one game in specific. A possible flaw in this method is
that there are so many video games that exist with multiplayer capabilities, so it would be
unreasonable to think I would be able to study them all. But even with that being said, many
games are similar with genres so, with that in mind, I plan to study games from different
genres/archetypes in order to get as broad of a variety as possible. By studying these different
games I can get as close as possible without actually studying every game ever made with chat
capabilities to find out any patterns that exist in hurtful communication behaviors. The second
part of my method is to actually run my own tests by watching unedited gameplay footage of
people playing multiplayer games on Youtube in order to try and find out the frequency of how
often people say derogatory things about minority groups. The coding mechanism I have come
up with is to code any communication into one of two categories. Either a neutral comment, or
negative comment. There is no need to code for positive comments as that is not what the paper
is trying to answer, and we don’t have much use for anything in the neutral category. On the
contrary, the negative category is very important to my research. First off, how do I decide if
something is “negative?” I define negative as putting down others through insults or hurtful
comments. So once I have classified something as negative, I then move into seeing if it is a
derogatory comment or not. To do this, I used Urban Dictionary. For those unfamiliar, Urban
Dictionary is an online dictionary that stays up to date with all the slang and code words people
use because it allows anyone to make an account and edit/create definitions for words. By having
anyone be able to make these definitions, they are much more up to date and have many different
entries for slang insults used in games. With the fact that anyone can make these definitions, the
question is how do we know if that person is telling the truth about a word's definition (AKA are
they credible)? With that in mind, when looking up words to see if it was considered derogatory
towards a minority group, I used the top five most popular definitions to make sure they all lined
up. If they all said the same thing and all had definitions saying that they were a derogatory term
towards a minority group, then it would go in a different category within the negative category.
Another part of my coding mechanism I am using is that I will be keeping track of the most
commonly used derogatory terms, and comparing it to a list of the most common derogatory
terms used today. The main benefit of doing this is by keeping track of all the different
derogatory terms I see/hear, I can then see if there are any patterns in derogatory term usage in

Research Sample G 6 of 13

video games compared to in general life. For example, perhaps the list is outdated and new
derogatory terms have come up that people now commonly use, or perhaps people are more
likely to say certain derogatory terms only in video games due to fear of consequences in real
life. This is significant to measure as in order to try and best contain or deal with the issue of
people throwing around derogatory words in video games with no disregard for others feelings,
we need to know what words they are using the most. If we know what words they are using the
most, we can target the roots of the issues by implementing education policies for young kids on
why these words should not under any circumstances be said, or even get the game companies to
implement policies banning the most common words. A limitation to the latter half of that
sentence is that people will always find workarounds to any chat filters, by putting things like
special characters in words (Examples being $,!,#,) to bypass them. Or, people will just come up
with new words to spread their hate or get people to laugh in video games due to thinking there
are no consequences to their words online. With all that being said, it would still be worth it to
know the top words in order for the education policies to work, but also to show that game
companies will not stand by while people use derogatory terms and will start cracking down on
people who use them. By running these tests, I am able to see the prevalence of hurtful
communication behaviors in specific games, and compare that to a study on the game itself to
see if any correlation exists. As these videos are depicting an online interaction, I expect to see
lots of negative responses from people just to get laughs in game. A limitation to this experiment
though is that communication is not guaranteed at fixed intervals, so it will be hard to quantify
exact numbers of hurtful communication behaviors in these games. Even with that being said, I
am using this method in order to show that there is an alarming hurtful communication behavior
rate, not necessarily trying to find the exact statistic. By proving that this statistic exists, and just
how bad it is compared to normal real life communication, I establish that my problem is real
and can also use the different prevalence levels to make inferences on how the game itself was
designed. The combination of these two methods is the best way to answer my research question
because of the gap in knowledge surrounding online multiplayer communication in video games
and why it has become as toxic as it has. Through studying both the games themselves and
players of said games, we can determine different influential factors on why they say what they
do. The reason both methods are needed is to determine if the games themselves and other
people's actions have a say in the players actions, or just one, or even neither (which is very

Research Sample G 7 of 13

unlikely due to us being a creature that learns from others actions). An example of needing the
player study aspect of this method is if someone sees someone says something mean in a game
and hears that person get the group laughing and complimented for how funny they are, that
spectator now perceives whatever the person said as okay and would likely try to make similar
comments/jokes in order to also get the so called “reward”, compliments and laughs. This shows
that communication behavior is learned from others, but the other half of the paper tries to target
the root of this issue. That root being how the first person who made the hurtful joke/comment
learned it was okay/good to say due to it getting laughs and compliments. Was it perhaps the
same situation as the second person in the hypothetical situation? Just hearing it and repeating it
because it got laughs? Or was it due to the actual design of the game they were playing, and
seeing it in the game made the person think it was okay. While there are a lot of confounding
variables to this study, such as not being able to control for household experiences that could also
play apart in gamers behavior online, using a combination of these two methods gives the most
complete picture possible of how toxicity in video games is inherent to the video games
themselves and the players of said games.
Content Analysis of Past Papers:
Moving onto the actual content analysis, an important paper to reference is the
Understanding Toxicity in Online Gaming: A Focus on Communication-Based Behaviours
towards Female Players in Valorant paper. In the video game community, Valorant is known for
having one of the most toxic player bases of all time and they put down minority groups in a
number of ways. For example, making their usernames into not nice words, sending hurtful
messages, saying hurtful things, etc. This paper is important because it intends to do the same
thing my paper does, but for a specific game and specific issue. In this case, the issue being
talked about is sexism and how male gamers will instantly put down female gamers if they hear
their voice in game. The study found a “reluctance among female players to use voice
communication due to fear of harassment.” This is important because it establishes this issue
actually exists, and when I put this source in comparison with others, I can use it to spot
commonalities between them. Such commonalities I look for are if another game also has a
known prevalence of sexism in its players communications, is there a correlation between the
two games designs. Such as genre of game or moral themes, or even if they are made by the

Research Sample G 8 of 13

same game development company. Additionally, this source brings up another aspect of video
game communication that is worth talking about, sexual harassment. When hearing a woman's
voice in game, some men are inclined to, instead of insulting, say very inappropriate things in
order to intimidate the women. This cannot be allowed to continue so we must find the source,
do people see others online say these things and repeat them? Is it the environment they are
raised in? Or does it have to do with the over sexualization of women in the video game industry
itself? Finally, a key piece to mention about this paper is how all of this toxic (not nice) behavior
happened in the ranked gamemode of valorant. To explain what that is, ranked is basically where
you go to see how you stack up against other people and get put into a rank (such as iron, silver,
diamond) based on your skill level. This creates an competitive atmosphere where winning, and
therefore going up the ranks, is something that players take super seriously which is unlike
unrated games that are just for fun. This hyper need to win makes players mad when they lose
due to their rank going down, and makes for a more toxic environment overall. It is important to
note this difference because I plan to look mainly at communication behaviors in these
competitive archetypes of game modes if the game offers them as that is where the most
communication happens. In unranked games, people are less likely to talk because they are just
there to have fun and don’t care if they win or lose, which is the exact opposite in ranked games.
For example, people talk and call out enemy positions and such to move up the ranks. The
perceived value of a video game rank is especially interesting to me because at the end of the
day, the rank really doesn’t mean anything and is pixels on a screen. So with that in mind, why is
it that something as fictional and valueless as a rank in a not real game causes people to say such
hurtful things to others? That question is another question I hope to answer through my study,
and my main hypothesis is that since the people communicating aren't actually seeing the person
who they are communicating with in real life, there is a detachment from actually caring about
the consequences of what they say, so they say whatever will get a rise out of the other person or
even make themselves feel better about themself.
Moving on, another source of utmost importance to answering my research question is
What Are the Morals of Video Game Stories? A Content Analysis of the Most Popular Video
Games by Marina A. Klimenko, Kevin Kapadiab, and Gaillot Jr Andrec. This paper is important
because while the paper above talks about user behavior in a specific game, this paper helps

Research Sample G 9 of 13

answer the other half of my research question. That being to what extent, if any, do the design of
video games themselves play a part in communication behavior of players in said games. A
limitation of this paper though is that they studied games that were singleplayer or did not have
much communication between players. While that may seem useless to my question, it actually
isn’t because many single player games are designed in the same ways in multiplayer. So,
through using a study on a single player game, we can draw the conclusion of whether or not the
design of the video games themselves play a larger role in player decisions, specifically when it
comes to communicating with other players. While we will talk about what the paper found in
regards to specific morals portrayed in the video games they studied, I first want to talk about
something I hadn’t considered before that this paper brought to light. The authors found that
between 1996 and 2021, there was a steady increase in individualized morals portrayed in the
type of video games they studied. They believe this to be because of the evolution of technology,
and I would agree with that fact. I bring this whole discovery up to reinforce the importance of
this study. As technology continues to evolve, our society needs to know how to combat toxic
behavior online and if the video game industry itself is part of the blame for people's not nice
behavior. While all moral content has increased in games there are two types that have seen the
highest increase over the years. “The researchers found that the binding and global domains have
increased more so than the individualizing moral themes. Binding domain is also the most
popular, with group loyalty as its most frequent theme in our sample.” This fact is almost
expected given that many of the game's settings and characters involve many different characters
all either working together or against each other which is where the loyalty aspect comes in. This
paper also found that there was a connection between the culture the video game company is
from and the moral themes displayed. For example, they found that “more violations of
individualizing moral values led to explicit negative evaluations. Since the majority of video
games in our sample was produced by companies that are located, predominantly, in Western
and/or individualistically oriented countries (e.g., the United States of America, Canada,
England, Germany, France), this confirms the idea that morality in video games stories is told
through the lens of their culture.” This is an important fact to consider because it goes even
further to the root of video game design, past the individual designers themselves and into the
cultures they are from and the ideas/beliefs said cultures instill in them which they then put in
games they make. Also, this fact shows that while some games portray morals that are similar to

Research Sample G 10 of 13

their cultures, they can also portray different morals like the quote above stated with group
loyalty being super important even though a lot of those games were made by game companies
from individualistic cultures. Finally, this paper shows that morals are portrayed in video games
to begin with, which is needed for my research method to even make sense. I plan to use the
coding mechanism the authors used in their paper to encode for different moral themes portrayed
specifically in multiplayer games. A limitation of this study is that single player games portray
much more moral themes because they are linear stories and have an end. Whereas multiplayer
games are designed to be played as much as the player wants, and only have limited story
options such as a campaign mode. (a mode in which instead of playing with real life players
online, you instead play through a story version of the game with computers controlling other
characters. It is important to note that the mechanics of the game stay mostly the same).
Campaign modes are what I plan to mainly study as multiplayer games don’t really have any
other story/moral portrays aside from promotional advertisements to get people to download the
game. By studying the campaign modes, which are prevalent with moral themes and decisions
the player has to make, I can see what morals/ideas the developers used to make the mode and
then apply that to the actual multiplayer gamemode as well. For example, if there is a prevalence
of oversexualization in the campaign mode of a specific game, I would look to see if there is any
overlap between that statistic and the level of sexism displayed in the multiplayer
communication features. By comparing the two, we can see the extent, if any, that the design of a
video game influences players communications behaviors, specifically in saying hurtful things to
others.
Results:
Firstly, let's start with the results for the first part of my method. I had two main papers
that I was able to put in contrast with one another based on specific minority issues. Firstly, I
used Understanding Toxicity in Online Gaming: A Focus on Communication-Based Behaviours
towards Female Players in Valorant. Like I mentioned earlier, Valorant is notorious for its overly
sexist community so I chose this paper to help understand why that is. Second, I chose a paper
called What Are the Morals of Video Game Stories? While this paper used a lot of different
games and didn’t focus on just one, the main category of the games chosen were story games
where they were primarily singleplayer. Specifically, I want to focus on the researcher's inclusion

Research Sample G 11 of 13

of Call of Duty due to it having both multiplayer and single player game modes. To answer my
question, it is important to include because people can play the story of Call of Duty and then
move right into the multiplayer game, which portrays different morals/ideals that could influence
players' communication behaviors. Now, what did I actually notice when I put these two sources
together? The biggest thing I noticed was that for the paper on morals in video games, they
talked about how games do in fact show morals. And even though they used a story game aspect
of Call of Duty, those morals still overlap into gameplay in the actual multiplayer version of the
game. That information shows that morals in these games can be portrayed without story modes
so games like Valorant, who don’t have one, can still influence players through things like
animated advertisements about the game's story. By showing this, this reveals that there is at
least some correlation between the design of a video games story and the actual behavior of
players in that game.
While the results for my other half of the method were much more interesting, this one is
a little more confusing. When I was looking for unedited videos of people playing multiplayer
games on YouTube, I could not come across any that had any derogatory terms towards minority
groups being used by its players. While I found this a little concerning, I thought about it and
came up with a hypothesis for why this is. If I am someone who uploads content to YouTube, I
do not want my content to be taken down by the website. And according to YouTube’s terms of
service, hate speech of any kind is not allowed so even if someone recorded somebody saying a
derogatory term, they wouldn’t post it out of fear of channel termination. While this does make
half my method void, I felt it important to include due to it being a point of future research and
also shows how hard it is to really get concrete statistics on frequency of derogatory term usage.
Limitations/Points for Future Research:
Moving onto limitations/points for future research, the main point for future research that
I talked about in the last paragraph would be running your own tests to find frequency of
derogatory terms towards minorities used. In order to do this, you’d have to either play your own
games or have other volunteers do it for you and basically use the same coding mechanism I
used, except you have direct access to people saying things that would get videos taken down on
a platform like YouTube. Additionally, a limitation of my study was my lack of foresight with

Research Sample G 12 of 13

implementing my method and not understanding how YouTube works. Finally, with the results I
actually have from the half of my method that wasn’t made void, I would say further research
should aim to further explore the effect of portrayed morals in video games effects on people's
communication behaviors in those games. While I did do that, I used two unrelated papers that
were talking about different games to come to my understanding, so it could be helpful to this
field if further research was done using just one game for both moral analysis and
communication behavior.

Research Sample G 13 of 13

Works Cited:
1. Duarte, F. (2025, March 28). How many gamers are there? (new 2025 statistics).
Exploding Topics. https://explodingtopics.com/blog/number-of-gamers
2. Greitemeyer T. (2019). The contagious impact of playing violent video games on
aggression: Longitudinal evidence. Aggressive behavior, 45(6), 635–642.
https://doi.org/10.1002/ab.21857
3. Przybylski, A., & Weinstein, N. (2019, February 13). Violent video game engagement is
not associated with adolescents’ aggressive behaviour: Evidence from a registered report
| Royal Society Open Science. Royal Society Open Science.
https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/10.1098/rsos.171474
4. Maharani, A., Puspita, V., Aurora, R. A., & Wiranito, N. (2024, May 22). Understanding
toxicity in online gaming: A focus on communication-based behaviours towards female
players in valorant. Jurnal Syntax Admiration.
https://www.jurnalsyntaxadmiration.com/index.php/jurnal/article/view/1137
5. Klimenko, M. A., Kapadia, K., & Andre, G., Jr. (2023). What Are the Morals of Video
Game Stories? A Content Analysis of the Most Popular Video Games. Journal of
Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 67(4), 553–573.
https://doi.org/10.1080/08838151.2023.2226280

AP RESEARCH 2025 • SCORING COMMENTARY

Academic Paper
Note: Student samples are quoted verbatim and may contain spelling and grammatical errors.
Overview
NEW for 2025: The question overviews can be found in the Chief Reader Report on Student Responses on
AP Central.
Sample: G
Score: 2
This paper earns a score of 2. The broad initial topic on p. 2 “I want to study how (if any) do video games
impact the behaviors taken in the game itself by the players…in multiplayer games with communication
methods such as voice chat and text messaging” narrows and changes focus on p. 4 “How do people
playing video games and the video games themselves spin society’s acceptance/indifference towards
people being openly discriminatory towards minority groups in video games?” This scope is not carried
through the entirety of the paper and continues to waver. For example, on p. 5 “analyze past papers that
have looked at certain discriminatory behaviors (such as sexism or racism) in certain games and then put
them in comparison with each other to glean any patterns or connections.”
The content analysis method of comparing two papers regarding discriminatory behaviors in video
games (e.g., Valorant) on pp. 4-7 is not replicable and the analysis of the papers on pp. 7-10 is largely
a report of information from the papers. However, the paper does present evidence of an attempt to
provide an analysis which suggests the described content analysis method was used. For example, on
p. 11: “what did I…notice when I put these two sources together?...they talked about how games do in
fact show morals…shows that morals in these games can be portrayed…” The second method of coding
discriminatory behaviors within the discussion between players in online games was not conducted, as
described on p.11. As such, the results on pages 7-11 are largely a report on existing knowledge.
The paper does not earn a score of 1, because there is a topic of inquiry with a narrowing scope.
Additionally, there are descriptions of methods which the paper attempts to use.
The paper does not earn a score of 3, because there are a limited number of scholarly sources
represented in the literature review. The paper provides multiple research methods that are not replicable.
For example, on pp. 4 and 5, the paper says they will use a content analysis that will study games, but
does not provide the parameters of which games. The results of the content analysis are a description
of the content of the two papers analyzed. Therefore, the paper does not convey a new understanding/
conclusion.

© 2025 College Board.

Visit College Board on the web: collegeboard.org.	

